
================================================================================
  📄  Special Marriage Act.pdf
     Pages: 25
================================================================================
1 
 
THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954 
______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
______ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions. 
3. Marriage Officers. 
CHAPTER II 
SOLEMNIZATION OF SPECIAL MARRIAGES 
 4. Conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages. 
 5. Notice of intended marriage. 
 6. Marriage Notice Book and publication. 
 7. Objection to marriage. 
 8. Procedure on receipt of objection. 
 9. Powers of Marriage Officers in respect of inquiries. 
10. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Officer abroad. 
11. Declaration by parties and witnesses. 
12. Place and form of solemnization. 
13. Certificate of marriage. 
14. New notice when marriage not solemnized within three months. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES CELEBRATED IN OTHER FORMS 
15. Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms. 
16. Procedure for registration. 
17. Appeals from orders under section 16. 
18. Effect of registration of marriage under this Chapter. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSEQUENCES OF MARRIAGE UNDER THIS ACT 
19. Effect of marriage on member of undivided family. 
20. Rights and disabilities not affected by Act. 
21. Succession to property of parties married under Act. 
21A. Special provision in certain cases. 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER V 
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION 
SECTIONS 
22. Restitution of conjugal rights. 
23. Judicial separation. 
CHAPTER VI 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 
24. Void marriages. 
25. Voidable marriages. 
26. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages. 
27. Divorce. 
27A. Alternative relief in divorce proceedings. 
28. Divorce by mutual consent. 
29. Restriction on petitions for divorce during first one year after marriage. 
30. Remarriage of divorced persons. 
CHAPTER VII 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE 
31. Court to which petition should be made. 
32. Contents and verification of petitions. 
33. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published. 
34. Duty of court in passing decrees. 
35. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings. 
36. Alimony pendente lite. 
37. Permanent alimony and maintenance. 
38. Custody of children. 
39. Appeals from decrees and orders. 
39A. Enforcement of decrees and orders. 
40. Application of Act 5 of 1908. 
40A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases. 
40B. Special provisions relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act. 
 40C. Documentary evidence. 
41. Power of High Court to make rules regulating procedure. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
42. Saving. 
43. Penalty on married person marrying again under this Act. 
44. Punishment of bigamy. 

3 
 
SECTIONS 
45. Penalty for signing false declaration or certificate. 
46. Penalty for wrongful action of Marriage Officer. 
47. Marriage Certificate Book to be open to inspection. 
48. Transmission of copies of entries in marriage records. 
49. Correction of errors. 
50. Power to make rules. 
51. Repeals and savings. 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 
 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954 
ACT NO. 43 OF 19541 
[9th October, 1954.] 
An Act to provide a special form of marriage in certain cases, for the registration of such and 
certain other marriages and for divorce. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:― 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.―(1) This Act may be called the Special Marriage           
Act, 1954. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***, and applies also to citizens of India domiciled in the 
territories to which this Act extends who are 3[in the State of Jammu and Kashmir]. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions.―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,― 
5* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
      * 
(b) “degrees of prohibited relationship”-a man and any of the persons mentioned in Part I of the 
First Schedule and a woman and any of the persons mentioned in Part II of the said Schedule are 
within the degrees of prohibited relationship. 
Explanation I.―Relationship includes,― 
(a) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood; 
(b) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate; 
(c) relationship by adoption as well as by blood; 
and all terms of relationship in this Act shall be construed accordingly. 
Explanation II.―“Full blood” and “half blood”―two persons are said to be related to each other by 
full blood when they are descended from a common ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when 
they are descended from a common ancestor but by different wives. 
Explanation III.―“Uterine blood”―two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood 
when they are descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands. 
Explanation IV.―In Explanations II and III, “ancestor” includes the father and “ancestress” the 
mother; 
6*  
 
 * 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
  * 
(d) “district” in relation to a Marriage Officer, means the area for which he is appointed as such 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 3; 
7[(e) “district court” means, in any area for which there is a city civil court, that court, and in any 
other area, the principal civil court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court which 
                                                      
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s.  2 and Schedule I and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 
1963, Section 3 and Schedule I (w.e.f. 1-10-1963).     
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31-10-
2019). 
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for “outside the said territories” (w.e.f. 31-8-1969). 
4. 1st January, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 3606, dated 17th December, 1954, published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3. 
The Act has been extended to State of Sikkim  vide notification No. S.O. 1629(E), dated 15th April 2021, see Gazette of India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 
5. Omitted by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29. 
6. Omitted by s. 29, ibid.  
7. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 20, for clause (e) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

5 
 
may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette as having 
jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act;] 
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
1[(g) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof.] 
3. Marriage Officers.―(1) For the purposes of this Act, the State Government may, by, notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint one or more Marriage Officers for the whole or any part of the State. 
2[(2) For the purposes of this Act, in its application to citizens of India domiciled in the territories to 
which this Act extends who are in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify such officers of the Central Government as it may think fit to 
be the Marriage Officers for the State or any part thereof.] 
CHAPTER II 
SOLEMNIZATION OF SPECIAL MARRIAGES 
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages.―Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to the solemnization of marriages, a 
marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the 
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:― 
(a) neither party has a spouse living; 
3[(b) neither party― 
(i) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or 
(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such 
a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or 
(iii) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity 4* * *;] 
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the age of eighteen years; 
5[(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship: 
Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a marriage between 
them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the degrees of 
prohibited relationship; and] 
6[(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, both parties are 
citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends]. 
7[Explanation.―In this section, “custom”, in relation to a person belonging to any tribe, community, 
group or family, means any rule which the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf as applicable to members of that tribe, community, group or family: 
Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the members of any tribe, community, 
group or family, unless the State Government is satisfied— 
(i) that such rule has been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time among those 
members; 
(ii) that such rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 3) Order, 1956 for clause (g). 
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 31-8-1969).   
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 21, for clause (b) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
4. The words “or epilepsy” omitted by Act 39 of 1999, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29-12-1999). 
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 1963, s. 2, for clause (d) (w.e.f. 22-9-1963).   
6. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for clause (e) (w.e.f. 31-8-1969).  
7.  Ins. by Act 32 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-9-1963). 
 

6 
 
(iii) that such rule, if applicable only to a family, has not been discontinued by the family.]  
5.  Notice of intended marriage.―When a marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the 
parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Second Schedule to 
the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has resided for a 
period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given. 
 6. Marriage Notice Book and publication.―(1) The Marriage Officer shall keep all notices given 
under section 5 with the records of his office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such 
notice in a book prescribed for that purpose, to be called the Marriage Notice Book, and such book shall 
be open for inspection at all reasonable times, without fee, by any person desirous of inspecting the same. 
(2) The Marriage Officer shall cause every such notice to be published by affixing a copy thereof to 
some conspicuous place in his office. 
(3) Where either of the parties to an intended marriage is not permanently residing within the local 
limits of the district of the Marriage Officer to whom the notice has been given under section 5, the 
Marriage Officer shall also cause a copy of such notice to be transmitted to the Marriage Officer of the 
district within whose limits such party is permanently residing, and that Marriage Officer shall thereupon 
cause a copy thereof to be affixed to some conspicuous place in his office. 
7. Objection to marriage.―(1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date 
on which any such notice has been published under sub-section (2) of section 6, object to the marriage on 
the ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions specified in section 4. 
(2) After the expiration of thirty days from the date on which notice of an intended marriage has been 
published under sub-section (2) of section 6, the marriage may be solemnized, unless it has been 
previously objected to under sub-section (1). 
(3) The nature of the objection shall be recorded in writing by the Marriage Officer in the Marriage 
Notice Book, be read over and explained if necessary, to the person making the objection and shall be 
signed by him or on his behalf. 
 8. Procedure on receipt of objection.―(1) If an objection is made under section 7 to an intended 
marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of 
the objection and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the solemnization of the marriage or the objection 
is withdrawn by the person making it; but the Marriage Officer shall not take more than thirty days from 
the date of the objection for the purpose of inquiring into the matter of the objection and arriving at a 
decision. 
(2) If the Marriage Officer upholds the objection and refuses to solemnize the marriage, either party 
to the intended marriage may, within a period of thirty days from the date of such refusal, prefer an appeal 
to the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has his office, and 
the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the Marriage Officer shall act in 
conformity with the decision of the court. 
9. Powers of Marriage Officers in respect of inquiries.―(1) For the purpose of any inquiry under 
section 8, the Marriage Officer shall have all the powers vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:― 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and inspection; 
(c) compelling the production of documents; 
(d) reception of evidence of affidavits; and 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
and any proceeding before the Marriage Officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 

7 
 
Explanation.―For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of any person to give evidence, the local 
limits of the jurisdiction of the Marriage Officer shall be the local limits of his district. 
(2) If it appears to the Marriage Officer that the objection made to an intended marriage is not 
reasonable and has not been made in good faith he may impose on the person objecting costs by way of 
compensation not exceeding one thousand rupees and award the whole or any part thereof, to the parties 
to the intended marriage, and any order for costs so made may be executed in the same manner as a 
decree passed by the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has 
his office. 
10. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Officer abroad.―Where an objection is made 
under section 7 to a Marriage Officer 1[in the State of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of an intended 
marriage in the State], and the Marriage Officer, after making such inquiry into the matter as he thinks fit, 
entertains a doubt in respect thereof, he shall not solemnize the marriage but shall transmit the record with 
such statement respecting the matter as he thinks fit to the Central Government, and the Central 
Government, after making such inquiry into the matter and after obtaining such advice as it thinks fit, 
shall give its decision thereon in writing to the Marriage Officer who shall act in conformity with the 
decision of the Central Government. 
11. Declaration by parties and witnesses.―Before the marriage is solemnized the parties and three 
witnesses shall, in the presence of the Marriage Officer, sign a declaration in the form specified in the 
Third Schedule to this Act, and the declaration shall be countersigned by the Marriage Officer. 
12. Place and form of solemnization.―(1) The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the 
Marriage Officer, or at such other place within a reasonable distance therefrom as the parties may desire, 
and upon such conditions and the payment of such additional fees as may be prescribed. 
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt: 
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless each party says to the other in 
the presence of the Marriage Officer and the three witnesses and in any language understood by the 
parties,―“I, (A), take the (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband)”. 
13. Certificate of marriage.―(1) When the marriage has been solemnized, the Marriage Officer 
shall enter a certificate thereof in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule in a book to be kept by him 
for that purpose and to be called the Marriage Certificate Book and such certificate shall be signed by the 
parties to the marriage and the three witnesses. 
(2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Certificate Book by the Marriage Officer, the 
Certificate shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been 
solemnized and that all formalities respecting the signatures of witnesses have been complied with. 
14. New notice when marriage not solemnized within three months.―Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within three calendar months from the date on which notice thereof has been given to the 
Marriage Officer as required by section 5, or where an appeal has been filed under sub-section (2) of 
section 8, within three months from the date of the decision of the district court on such appeal or, where 
the record of a case has been transmitted to the Central Government under section 10, within three months 
from the date of decision of the Central Government, the notice and all other proceedings arising 
therefrom shall be deemed to have lapsed, and no Marriage Officer shall solemnize the marriage until a 
new notice has been given in the manner laid down in this Act. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES CELEBRATED IN OTHER FORMS 
15. Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms.―Any marriage celebrated, whether 
before or after the commencement of this Act, other than a marriage solemnized under the Special 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for “outside the territories to which this Act extends in respect of an intended marriage outside 
the said territories” (w.e.f. 31-8-1969). 

8 
 
Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), or under this Act, may be registered under this Chapter by a Marriage 
Officer in the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:― 
(a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the parties and they have .been living 
together as husband and wife ever since; 
(b) neither party has at the time of registration more than one spouse living; 
(c) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of registration; 
(d) the parties have completed the age of twenty-one years at the time of registration; 
(e) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship: 
Provided that in the case of a marriage celebrated before the commencement of this Act, this 
condition shall be subject to any law, custom or usage having the force of law governing each of them 
which permits of a marriage between the two; and 
(f) the parties have been residing within the district of the Marriage Officer for a period of not less 
than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which the application is made to him for 
registration of the marriage. 
16. Procedure for registration.―Upon receipt of an application signed by both the parties to the 
marriage for the registration of their marriage under this Chapter the Marriage Officer shall give public 
notice thereof in such manner as may be prescribed and after allowing a period of thirty days for 
objections and after hearing any objection received within that period, shall, if satisfied that all the 
conditions mentioned in section 15 are fulfilled, enter a certificate of the marriage in the Marriage 
Certificate Book in the form specified in the Fifth Schedule, and such certificate shall be signed by the 
parties to the marriage and by three witnesses. 
17. Appeals from orders under section 16.―Any person aggrieved by any order of a Marriage 
Officer refusing to register a marriage under this Chapter may, within thirty days from the date of the 
order, appeal against that order to the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
Marriage Officer has his office, and the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the 
Marriage Officer to whom the application was made shall act in conformity with such decision. 
18. Effect of registration of marriage under this Chapter.―Subject to the provisions contained in 
sub-section (2) of section 24, where a certificate of marriage has been finally entered in the Marriage 
Certificate Book under this Chapter, the marriage shall, as from the date of such entry, be deemed to be a 
marriage solemnized under this Act, and all children born after the date of the ceremony of marriage 
(whose names shall also be entered in the Marriage Certificate Book) shall in all respects be deemed to be 
and always to have been the legitimate children of their parents: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as conferring upon any such 
children any rights in or to the property of any person other than their parents in any case where, but for 
the passing of this Act, such children would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such 
rights by reason of their not being the legitimate children of their parents. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSEQUENCES OF MARRIAGE UNDER THIS ACT 
19. Effect of marriage on member of undivided family.―The marriage solemnized under this Act 
of any member of an undivided family who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religions shall be 
deemed to effect his severance from such family. 
20. Rights and disabilities not affected by Act.―Subject to the provisions of section 19, any person 
whose marriage is solemnized under this Act shall have the same rights and shall be subject to the same 
disabilities in regard to the right of succession to any property as a person to whom the Caste Disabilities 
Removal Act, 1850 (21 of 1850), applies. 
21. Succession to property of parties married under Act.―Notwithstanding any restrictions 
contained in the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), with respect to its application to members of 

9 
 
certain communities, succession to the property or any person whose marriage is solemnized under this 
Act and to the property of the issue of such marriage shall be regulated by the provisions of the said Act 
and for the purposes of this Act shall have effect as if Chapter III of Part V (Special Rules for Parsi 
Intestates) had been omitted therefrom. 
1[21A. Special provision in certain cases.―Where the marriage is solemnized under this Act of any 
person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion with a person who professes the Hindu, 
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion, section 19 and section 21 shall not apply and so much of section 20 as 
creates a disability shall also not apply.] 
CHAPTER V 
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION 
 22. Restitution of conjugal rights.―When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable 
excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the district 
court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made 
in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly. 
2[Explanation.―Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal 
from the society, the burden of providing reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn 
from the society.] 
 23. Judicial separation.―(1) A petition for judicial separation may be presented to the district court 
either by the husband or the wife,― 
(a) on any of the grounds specified 3[in sub-section (1) 4[and sub-section (1A)] of section 27] on 
which a petition for divorce might have been presented; or 
(b) on the ground of failure to comply with a decree for restitution of conjugal rights; 
and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that there is no 
legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judicial separation accordingly. 
(2) Where the court grants a decree for judicial separation, it shall be no longer obligatory for the 
petitioner to cohabit with the respondent, but the court may, on the application by petition of either party 
and on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, rescind the decree if it 
considers it just and reasonable to do so.  
CHAPTER VI 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 
24. Void marriages.―(1) Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be null and void 5[and may, 
on a petition presented by either party thereto against the other party, be so declared] by a decree of 
nullity if― 
(i) any of the conditions specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section 4 has not been 
fulfilled; or 
(ii) the respondent was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time of the institution of 
the suit. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any marriage deemed to be solemnized under this 
Act within the meaning of section 18, but the registration of any such marriage under Chapter III may be 
declared to be of no effect if the registration was in contravention of any of the conditions specified in 
clauses (a) to (e) of section 15: 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 22 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
2. Added by s. 23, ibid. 
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1970, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 12-8-1970). 
4. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
5. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “and may be so declared” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  

10 
 
Provided that no such declaration shall be made in any case where an appeal has been preferred under 
section 17 and the decision of the district court has become final. 
25. Voidable marriages.―Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be voidable and may be 
annulled by a decree of nullity if,― 
(i) the marriage has not been consummated owing to the wilful refusal of the respondent to 
consummate the marriage; or 
(ii) the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the 
petitioner; or 
(iii) the consent of either party to the marriage was obtained by coercion or fraud, as defined in 
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872): 
Provided that, in the case specified in clause (ii), the court shall not grant a decree unless it is 
satisfied,― 
(a) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged; 
(b) that proceedings were instituted within a year from the date of the marriage; and 
(c) that marital intercourse with the consent of the petitioner has not taken place since the 
discovery by the petitioner of the existence of the grounds for a decree: 
Provided further that in the case specified in clause (iii), the court shall not grant a decree if,― 
(a) proceedings have not been instituted within one year after the coercion had ceased or, as the 
case may be, the fraud had been discovered; or 
(b) the petitioner has with his or her free consent lived with the other party to the marriage as 
husband and wife after the coercion had ceased or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered. 
1[26. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages.―(1) Notwithstanding that a marriage 
is null and void under section 24, any child of such marriage who would have been legitimate if the 
marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is born before or after the commencement 
of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree of nullity is 
granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to be void 
otherwise than on a petition under this Act. 
(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of a voidable marriage under section 25, any child 
begotten or conceived before the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the parties 
to the marriage if at the date of the decree it has been dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be deemed 
to be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be construed as conferring upon any 
child of a marriage which is null and void or which is annulled by a decree of nullity under section 25, 
any rights in or to the property of any person, other than the parents, in any case where, but for the 
passing of this Act, such child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such rights by 
reason of not his being the legitimate child of his parents.] 
 27. Divorce.―2[(1)] Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition 
for divorce may be presented to the district court either by the husband or the wife on the ground that the 
respondent― 
3[(a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any 
person other than his or her spouse; or 
(b) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition; or] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 26, for section 26 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Section 27 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 29 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12-8-1970).  
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27, for clauses (a) and (b).   

11 
 
(c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or more for an offence as defined in 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
1* 
 
 
* 
 
   * 
                     *  
 
* 
(d) has since the solemnization of the marriage treated the petitioner with cruelty; or 
2[(e) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently 
from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be 
expected to live with the respondent. 
Explanation.―In this clause,― 
(a) the expression “mental disorder” means mental illness, arrested or incomplete 
development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of mind and 
includes schizophrenia; 
(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder” means a persistent disorder or disability of mind 
(whether or not including sub-normality of intelligence) which results in abnormally aggressive 
or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the respondent, and whether or not it requires or 
is susceptible to medical treatment; or 
(f) has been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form; or] 
3* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(h) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons who 
would naturally have heard of the respondent if the respondent had been alive; 4* * * 
5[Explanation.―In this sub-section, the expression “desertion” means desertion of the petitioner by 
the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and without the consent or against the wish of 
such party, and includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage, and its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;] 
6*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
7*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
8[(1A) A wife may also present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground,― 
(i) that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or 
bestiality; 
(ii) that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 
1956), or in a proceeding under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (or 
under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898) (5 of 1898), a decree 
or order, as the case may be, has been passed against the husband awarding maintenance to the wife 
notwithstanding that she was living apart and that since the passing of such decree or order, 
cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed for one year or upwards.] 
                                                      
1. The Proviso omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for clauses (e) and (f) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
3. Clause (g) omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-3-2019). 
4. The word “or” omitted by Act 29 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12-8-1970). 
5. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
6. The words “and by the wife on the ground that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, 
sodomy or bestiality” omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
7. Omitted by Act 29 of 1970), s. 3 (w.e.f. 12-8-1970).   
8. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  

12 
 
1[(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, either party to a marriage, 
whether solemnized before or after the commencement of the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, 1970 
(29 of 1970), may present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground―(i) that there has been 
no resumption of cohabitation as between the parties to the marriage for a period of one year or upwards 
after the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding to which they were parties; or 
(ii) that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of one year or upwards after the passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a 
proceeding to which they were parties.] 
2[27A. Alternative relief in divorce proceedings.―In any proceeding under this Act, on a petition 
for dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce, except insofar as the petition is founded on the ground 
mentioned in clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section 27, the court may, if it considers it just so to do 
having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass instead a decree for judicial separation.]  
28. Divorce by mutual consent.―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made 
thereunder, a petition for divorce may be presented to the district court by both the parties together on the 
ground that they have been living separately for a period of one year or more, that they have not been able 
to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved. 
(2) 3[On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of the 
presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section (1) and not later than eighteen months] after the said 
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the district court shall, on being satisfied, after 
hearing the parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized 
under this Act, and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree declaring the marriage to be 
dissolved with effect from the date of the decree.  
29. Restriction on petitions for divorce during first one year after marriage.―(1) No petition for 
divorce shall be presented to the district court 4[unless at the date of the presentation of the petition one 
year has passed] since the date of entering the certificate of marriage in the Marriage Certificate Book: 
Provided that the district court may, upon application being made to it, allow a petition to be 
presented 5[before one year has passed] on the ground that the case is one of exceptional hardship 
suffered by the petitioner or of exceptional depravity on the part of the respondent, but if it appears to the 
district court at the hearing of the petition that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by any 
misrepresentation or concealment of the nature of the case, the district court may, if it pronounces a 
decree, do so subject to the condition that the decree shall not have effect until after the  6[expiry of one 
year] from the date of the marriage or may dismiss the petition, without prejudice to any petition, which 
may be brought after the 7[expiration of the said one year] upon the same, or substantially the same, facts 
as those proved in support of the petition so dismissed. 
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to present a petition for divorce before 
the 8[expiration of one year] from the date of the marriage, the district court shall have regard to the 
interests of any children of the marriage, and to the question whether there is a reasonable probability of a 
reconciliation between the parties before the expiration of the 9[said one year]. 
30. Remarriage of divorced persons.―Where a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of divorce, 
and either there is no right of appeal against the decree or if there is such a right of appeal, the time for 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12-8-1970). 
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than one year after the date of the presentation of 
the petition referred to in sub-section (1) and not later than two years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
4. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “unless at the date of the presentation of the petition three years have passed” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
5. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “before three years have passed” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “expiry of three years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
7. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “expiration of the said three years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
8. Subs. by s. 30, ibid.,for “expiration of the three years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
9. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “said three years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  

13 
 
appealing has expired without an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has been presented but has 
been dismissed 1* * * either party to the marriage may marry again. 
CHAPTER VII 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE 
31. Court to which petition should be made.―2[(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI 
shall be presented to the district court within the local limits of whose original civil jurisdiction-- 
(i) the marriage was solemnized; or 
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition resides; or 
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or 
3[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on the date of presentation of the 
petition; or] 
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the 
respondent is at that time residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been 
heard of as being alive for a period of seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if 
he were alive.] 
(2) Without prejudice to any jurisdiction exercisable by the court under sub-section (1), the district 
court may, by virtue of this sub-section, entertain a petition by a wife domiciled in the territories to which 
this Act extends for nullity of marriage or for divorce if she is resident in the said territories and has been 
ordinarily resident therein for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of the 
petition and the husband is not resident in the said territories. 
32. Contents and verification of petitions.―(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall 
state, as distinctly as the nature of the case permits the facts on which the claim to relief is founded, and 
shall also state that there is no collusion between, the petitioner and the other party to the marriage. 
(2) The statements contained in every such petition shall be verified by the petitioner or some other 
competent person in the manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and may, at the hearing, be 
referred to as evidence. 
 4[33. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published.―(1) Every proceeding 
under this Act shall be conducted in camera and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish 
any matter in relation to any such proceeding except a judgment of the High Court or of the Supreme 
Court printed or published with the previous permission of the Court.  
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of the provisions contained in                
sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.] 
34. Duty of court in passing decrees.―(1) In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, 
whether defended or not, if the court is satisfied that,― 
(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists; and 
(b) 5[where the petition is founded on the ground specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 
section 27, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or connived at or condoned the act 
of sexual intercourse referred to therein], or, where the ground of the petition is cruelty,  
the petitioner has not in any manner condoned the cruelty; and 
(c) when divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such consent has not been obtained 
by force, fraud or undue influence; and 
                                                      
1. The words “and one year has elapsed thereafter but not sooner” omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 31, (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).   
2.  Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3.  Ins. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23-12-2003). 
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 33, for section 33 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 34, ibid. for “where the ground of the petition is adultery, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or 
connived at or condoned the adultery” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).   

14 
 
(d) the petition is not presented or prosecuted in collusion with the respondent; and 
(e) there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in instituting the proceedings; and 
(f) there is no other legal ground why the relief should not be granted;  
then, and in such a case, but not otherwise, the court shall decree such relief accordingly. 
(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under this Act it shall be the duty of the court in the first 
instance, in every case where it is possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the 
case, to make every endeavour to bring about a reconciliation between the parties: 
1[Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any proceeding wherein relief is 
sought on any of the grounds specified in clause (c), clause (e), clause (f), clause (g) and clause (h) of sub-
section (1) of section 27.] 
2[(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such reconciliation, the court may, if the 
parties so desire or if the court thinks it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable 
period not exceeding fifteen days and refer the matter to any person named by the parties in this behalf or 
to any person nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with directions to report to the 
court as to whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the court shall in disposing of the 
proceeding have due regard to the report. 
(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce, the court passing the decree 
shall give a copy thereof free of cost to each of the parties.] 
 3[35. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings.―In any proceeding for divorce or 
judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights, the respondent may not only oppose the relief sought 
on the ground of petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, but also make a counter-claim for any relief 
under this Act on that ground, and if the petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion is proved, the court 
may give to the respondent any relief under this Act to which he or she would have been entitled if he or 
she had presented a petition seeking such relief on that ground.]  
36. Alimony pendente lite.―Where in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI it appears to 
the district court that the wife has no independent income sufficient for her support and the necessary 
expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife, order the husband to pay to her the 
expenses of the proceeding, and weekly or monthly during the proceeding such sum as having regard to 
the husband’s income, it may seem to the court to be reasonable. 
 4[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and such weekly or 
monthly sum during the proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed 
of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the husband.] 
37. Permanent alimony and maintenance.―(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chapter V 
or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent to the decree, on 
application made to it for the purpose, order that the husband shall secure to the wife for her maintenance 
and support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband’s property such gross sum or such monthly or 
periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her life, as, having regard to her own property, if 
any, her husband’s property and ability 5[the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case], it 
may seem to the court to be just. 
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any 
time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify 
or rescind any such order in such manner as it may seem to the court to be just. 
                                                      
1. Added by Act 68 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for section 35 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
4. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 6 (w.e.f. 24-9-2001).   
5.  Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 36, for “and the conduct of the parties” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

15 
 
(3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order has been made under this 
section has remarried or is not leading a chaste life, 1[it may, at the instance of the husband vary, modify 
or rescind any such order and in such manner as the court may deem just.] 
38. Custody of children.―In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI the district court may, 
from time to time, pass such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may seem to it to 
be just and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of minor children, consistently 
with their wishes wherever possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by petition for the 
purpose, make, revoke, suspend or vary, from time to time, all such orders and provisions with respect to 
the custody, maintenance and education of such children as might have been made by such decree or 
interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree were still pending. 
2[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor children, 
during the proceeding, under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within 
sixty days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.] 
3[39. Appeals from decrees and orders.―(1) All decrees made by the court in any proceeding under 
Chapter V or Chapter VI shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be appealable as decrees of the 
court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and such appeal shall lie to the court to which 
appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction. 
(2) Orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act, under section 37 or section 38 shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be appealable if they are not interim orders, and every such 
appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in the 
exercise of its original jurisdiction. 
(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject of costs only. 
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a 4[period of ninety days] from the date 
of the decree or order.  
 39A. Enforcement of decrees and orders.―All decrees and orders made by the court in any 
proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders 
of the court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being are enforced.] 
 40. Application of Act 5 of 1908.―Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, and to such 
rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as far 
as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 
5[40A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases.―(1) Where― 
(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to the district court having jurisdiction, by a party 
to the marriage praying for a decree for judicial separation under section 23 or for a decree of divorce 
under section 27, and 
(b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter by the other party to the marriage 
praying for decree for judicial separation under section 23, or for decree of divorce under section 27 
on any ground whether in the same district court, or in a different district court, in the same State or in 
a different State, the petition shall be dealt with as specified in sub-section (2). 
(2) In a case where sub-section (1) applies,― 
(a) if the petitions are presented to the same district court, both the petitions shall be tried and 
heard together by that district court; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 36, for “it shall rescind the order” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
2. The proviso ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 7 (w.e.f. 24-9-2001).  
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 37, for section 39 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 3, for “period of thirty days” (w.e.f. 23-12-2003). 
5. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 38 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

16 
 
(b) if the petitions are presented to different district courts, the petitions presented later shall be 
transferred to the district court in which the earlier petition was presented and both the petitions shall 
be heard and disposed of together by the district court in which the earlier petition was presented. 
(3) In a case where clause (b) of sub-section (2) applies, the court or the Government, as the case may 
be, competent under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), to transfer any suit or proceeding 
from the district court in which the later petition has been presented to the district court in which the 
earlier petition is pending, shall exercise its powers to transfer such later petition as if it had been 
empowered so to do under the said Code.  
40B. Special provisions relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act.―(1) The trial of 
a petition under this Act shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of justice in respect of 
the trial, be continued from day to day, until its conclusions, unless the court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded. 
(2) Every petition under this Act shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the 
respondent. 
(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the hearing within three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on the 
respondent. 
40C. Documentary evidence.―Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment to the 
contrary, no document shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceeding at the trial of a petition under 
this Act on the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered.] 
41. Power of High Court to make rules regulating procedure.―(1) The High Court shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules consistent with the provisions contained in this Act 
and the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as it may consider expedient for the purpose of 
carrying into effect the provisions of Chapters V, VI and VII. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such rules shall 
provide for,― 
(a) the impleading by the petitioner of the adulterer as a co-respondent on a petition for divorce 
on the ground of adultery, and the circumstances in which the petitioner may be execused from doing 
so; 
(b) the awarding of damages against any such co-respondent; 
(c) the intervention in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI by any person not already a 
party thereto; 
(d) the form and contents of petitions for nullity of marriage or for divorce and the payment of 
costs incurred by parties to such petitions; and 
(e) any other matter for which no provision or no sufficient provision is made in this Act, and for 
which provision is made in the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 1869). 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
42. Saving.―Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the validity of any marriage not solemnized 
under its provisions; nor shall this Act be deemed directly or indirectly to affect the validity of any mode 
of contracting marriage. 
43. Penalty on married person marrying again under this Act.―Save as otherwise provided in 
Chapter III, every person who, being at the time married, procures, a marriage of himself or herself to be 
solemnized under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 494 or section 
495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), as the case may be, and the marriage so solemnized shall be 
void. 

17 
 
44. Punishment of bigamy.―Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and who, 
during the lifetime of his or her wife or husband, contracts any other marriage shall be subject to the 
penalties provided in section 494 and section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), for the offence 
of marrying again during the lifetime of a husband or wife, and the marriage so contracted shall be void. 
45. Penalty for signing false declaration or certificate.―Every person making, signing or attesting 
any declaration or certificate required by or under this Act containing a statement which is false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true shall be guilty of the offence 
described in section 199 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
46. Penalty for wrongful action of Marriage Officer.―Any Marriage Officer who knowingly and 
wilfully solemnizes a marriage under this Act,― 
(1) without publishing a notice regarding such marriage as required by section 5, or 
(2) within thirty days of the publication of the notice of such marriage, or 
(3) in contravention of any other provision in this Act, 
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
47. Marriage Certificate Book to be open to inspection.―(1) The Marriage Certificate Book kept 
under this Act shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection and shall be admissible as evidence of 
the statements therein contained. 
(2) Certified extracts from the Marriage Certificate Book shall, on application, be given by the 
Marriage Officer to the applicant on payment by him of the prescribed fee. 
 48. Transmission of copies of entries in marriage records.―Every Marriage Officer in a State 
shall send to Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages of that State at such intervals and in such 
form as may be prescribed, a true copy of all entries made by him in the Marriage Certificate Book since 
the last of such intervals, and, in the case of Marriage Officers outside the territories to which this Act 
extends, the true copy shall be sent to such authority as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf. 
49. Correction of errors.―(1) Any Marriage Officer who discovers any error in the form or 
substance of any entry in the Marriage Certificate Book may, within one month next after the discovery of 
such error, in the presence of the persons married or, in case of their death or absence, in the presence of 
two other credible witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin without any alteration of the original 
entry and shall sign the marginal entry and add thereto the date of such correction and the Marriage 
Officer shall make the like marginal entry in the certificate thereof. 
(2) Every correction made under this section shall be attested by the witnesses in whose presence it 
was made. 
(3) Where a copy of any entry has already been sent under section 48 to the Registrar-General or 
other authority the Marriage Officer shall make and send in like manner a separate certificate of the 
original erroneous entry and of the marginal corrections therein made. 
 50. Power to make rules.―(1) The Central Government, in the case of 1* * * officers of the Central 
Government, and the State Government, in all other cases, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:― 
(a) the duties and powers of Marriage Officers and the areas in which they may exercise 
jurisdiction; 
                                                      
1. The words “diplomatic and consular officers and other” omitted by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31-8-1969).   

18 
 
(b) the manner in which a Marriage Officer may hold inquiries under this Act and the procedure 
therefor; 
(c) the form and manner in which any books required by or under this Act shall be maintained; 
(d) the fees that may be levied for the performance of any duty imposed upon a Marriage Officer 
under this Act; 
(e) the manner in which public notice shall be given under section 16; 
(f) the form in which, and the intervals within which, copies of entries in the Marriage Certificate 
Book shall be sent in pursuance of section 48; 
(g) any other matter which may be or requires to be prescribed. 
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as it is made before 
the State Legislature.] 
 51. Repeals and savings.―(1) The Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), and any law 
corresponding to the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), in force in any Part B State immediately 
before the commencement of this Act are hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,― 
(a) all marriages duly solemnized under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), or any such 
corresponding law shall be deemed to have been solemnized under this Act; 
(b) all suits and proceedings in causes and matters matrimonial which, when this Act comes into 
operation, are pending in any court, shall be dealt with and decided by such court, so far as may be, as 
if they had been originally instituted therein under this Act. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall be without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 
6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), which shall also apply to the repeal of the corresponding 
law as if such corresponding law had been an enactment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15.3.1984). 
 

19 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(b) “Degrees of prohibited relationship”] 
PART I 
1. Mother. 
2. Father’s widow (step-mother). 
3. Mother’s mother. 
4. Mother’s father’s widow (step grand-mother). 
5. Mother’s mother’s mother. 
6. Mother’s mother’s father’s widow (step great grand-mother). 
7. Mother’s father’s mother. 
8. Mother’s father’s father’s widow (step great grand-mother). 
9. Father’s mother. 
10. Father’s father’s widow (step-grand mother). 
11. Father’s mother’s mother. 
12. Father’s mother’s father’s widow (step great grand-mother). 
13. Father’s father’s mother. 
14. Father’s father’s father’s widow (step great grand-mother). 
15. Daughter. 
16. Son’s widow. 
17. Daughter’s daughter. 
18. Daughter’s son’s widow. 
19. Son’s daughter. 
20. Son’s son’s widow. 
21. Daughter’s daughter’s daughter. 
22. Daughter’s daughter’s son’s widow. 
23. Daughter’s son’s daughter. 
24. Daughter’s son’s son’s widow. 
25. Son’s daughter’s daughter. 
26. Son’s daughter’s son’s widow. 
27. Son’s son’s daughter. 
28. Son’s son’s son’s widow. 
29. Sister. 
30. Sister’s daughter. 
31. Brother’s daughter. 
32. Mother’s sister. 
33. Father’s sister. 
34. Father’s brother’s daughter. 

20 
 
35. Father’s sister’s daughter. 
36. Mother’s sister’s daughter. 
37. Mother’s brother’s daughter. 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this Part, the expression “widow” includes a divorced wife. 
PART II 
1. Father. 
2. Mother’s husband (step-father). 
3. Father’s father. 
4. Father’s mother’s husband (step grand-father). 
5. Father’s father’s father. 
6. Father’s father’s mother’s husband (step great grand-father). 
7. Father’s mother’s father. 
8. Father’s mother’s mother’s husband (step great grand-father). 
9. Mother’s father. 
10. Mother’s mother’s husband (step grand-father). 
11. Mother’s father’s father. 
12. Mother’s father’s mother’s husband (step great grand-father). 
13. Mother’s mother’s father. 
14. Mother’s mother’s mother’s husband (step great grand-father). 
15. Son. 
16. Daughter’s husband. 
17. Son’s son. 
18. Son’s daughter’s husband. 
19. Daughter’s son. 
20. Daughter’s daughter’s husband. 
21. Son’s son’s son. 
22. Son’s son’s daughter’s husband. 
23. Son’s daughter’s son. 
24. Sen’s daughter’s daughter’s husband. 
25. Daughter’s son’s son. 
26. Daughter’s son’s daughter’s husband. 
27. Daughter’s daughter’s son. 
28. Daughter’s daughter’s daughter’s husband. 
29. Brother. 
30. Brother’s son. 
31. Sister’s son. 
32. Mother’s brother. 

21 
 
33. Father’s brother. 
34. Father’s brother’s son. 
35. Father’s sister’s son. 
36. Mother’s sister’s son. 
37. Mother’s brother’s son. 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this part, the expression “husband” includes a divorced husband. 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 5) 
NOTICE OF INTENDED MARRIAGE 
To 
Marriage Officer for the .........................................................................District. 
We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, is intended to be 
solemnized between us within three calendar months from the date hereof. 
Name    
Condition 
Occupation 
Age 
Dwelling 
place  
Permanent place 
dwelling  if present 
dwelling place not 
permanent 
Length of 
residence 
A.B.  
Unmarried 
  
Widower 
Divorcee 
C.D. 
Unmarried 
Widow 
Divorcee 
Witness our hands this ....................................day of...........................................20...... 
(Sd.) A.B., 
(Sd.) C.D., 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 11) 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM 
I, A.B., hereby declare as follows:― 
1.  I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower or a divorcee, as the case may be). 
2.  I have completed .....years of age. 
3.  I am not related to C.D. (the bride) within the degrees of prohibited relationship. 
4.  I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I 
either know or believe it to be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and 
also to fine. 
(Sd.) A.B. (the Bridegroom). 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE 
I, C.D., hereby declare as follows:― 
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widow or a divorcee, as the case may be). 
2. I have completed ....years of age. 
3. I am not related to A.B. (the Bridegroom) within the degrees of prohibited relationship. 
4. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I 
either know or believe it to be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and 
also to fine. 
(Sd.) C.D. (the Bride) 
Signed in our presence by the above-named A.B. and C.D. So far as we are aware there is no lawful 
impediment to the marriage. 
(Sd.) G.H.                                     
(Sd.) I.J.           Three witnesses. 
(Sd.) K.L.        
                  Countersigned E.F.,  
         Marriage Officer  
Dated the                                           day of                                     20 
 

24 
 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 13) 
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE 
 
I, E.F., hereby certify that on the………………………………………………………………….day of   
………………………………………………20…………..,A.B. and C.D* appeared before me and 
that each of them, in my presence and in the presence of three witnesses who have signed hereunder, 
made the declarations required by section 11 and that a marriage under this Act was solemnized between 
them in my presence. 
(Sd.) E.F., 
                                                   Marriage Officer for 
(Sd.) A.B., 
                           Bridegroom 
(Sd.) C.D.,                  Bride. 
 
(Sd.) G.H. 
(Sd.) I.J.            Three witnesses 
(Sd.) K.L. 
Dated the                                                day of                                            20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
* Herein give particulars of the parties. 

25 
 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 16) 
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE CELEBRATED IN OTHER FORMS 
I, E.F., hereby certify that A.B. and CD.* appeared before me this …………day of………. 20 and 
that each of them, in my presence and in the presence of three witnesses who have signed hereunder have 
declared that a ceremony of marriage has been performed between them and that they have been living 
together as husband and wife since the time of their marriage, and that in accordance with their desire to 
have 
their 
marriage 
registered 
under 
this 
Act, 
the 
said 
marriage 
has, 
this 
day 
of           
20……..................... been registered under this Act, having effect as from. 
 
 
(Sd.) E.F.,                                       
                                                        Marriage Officer for 
(Sd.) A.B.,                                       
                      Husband. 
(Sd.) C.D.                                        
                        Wife. 
(Sd.) G.H.                                        
(Sd.) IJ.               Three witnesses. 
(Sd.) K.L.                                         
 
 
Dated the                                           day of                                      20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
* Herein give particulars of the parties. 


================================================================================
  📄 Domestic Violence Act.pdf
     Pages: 12
================================================================================
1 
 
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
_____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
_____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
 
CHAPTER II 
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 
3. Definition of domestic violence. 
 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND DUTIES OF PROTECTION OFFICERS, SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC. 
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclusion of liability of informant. 
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate. 
6. Duties of shelter homes. 
7. Duties of medical facilities. 
8. Appointment of Protection Officers. 
9. Duties and functions of Protection Officers. 
10. Service providers. 
11. Duties of Government. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING ORDERS OF RELIEFS 
12. Application to Magistrate. 
13. Service of notice. 
14. Counselling. 
15. Assistance of welfare expert. 
16. Proceedings to be held in camera. 
17. Right to reside in a shared household. 
18. Protection orders. 
19. Residence orders. 
20. Monetary reliefs. 
21. Custody orders. 
22. Compensation orders. 
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders. 
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost. 
25. Duration and alteration of orders. 
26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings. 
27. Jurisdiction. 
28. Procedure. 
 
 

2 
 
SECTIONS 
29. Appeal. 
 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30. Protection Officers and members of service providers to be public servants. 
31. Penalty for breach of protection order by respondent. 
32. Cognizance and proof. 
33. Penalty for not discharging duty by Protection Officer. 
34. Cognizance of offence committed by Protection Officer. 
35. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
36. Act not in derogation of any other law. 
37. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
 
 

3 
 
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
ACT NO. 43 OF 2005 
[13th September, 2005.] 
An Act to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the 
Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women 
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “aggrieved person” means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with 
the respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence by the 
respondent; 
(b) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years and includes any adopted, step or 
foster child; 
(c) “compensation order” means an order granted in terms of section 22; 
(d) “custody order” means an order granted in terms of section 21; 
(e) “domestic incident report” means a report made in the prescribed form on receipt of a 
complaint of domestic violence from an aggrieved person; 
(f) “domestic relationship” means a relationship between two persons who live or have, at any 
point of time, lived together in a shared household, when they are related by consanguinity, marriage, 
or through a relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living together as 
a joint family; 
(g) “domestic violence” has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3; 
(h) “dowry” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961); 
(i) “Magistrate” means the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or as the case may be, the 
Metropolitan Magistrate, exercising jurisdiction under the Code of Criminal Procedure,                     
1973 (2 of 1974) in the area where the aggrieved person resides temporarily or otherwise or the 
respondent resides or the domestic violence is alleged to have taken place; 
(j) “medical facility” means such facility as may be notified by the State Government to be a 
medical facility for the purposes of this Act; 
(k) “monetary relief” means the compensation which the Magistrate may order the respondent to 
pay to the aggrieved person, at any stage during the hearing of an application seeking any relief under 
this Act, to meet the expenses incurred and the losses suffered by the aggrieved person as a result of 
the domestic violence; 
(l) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified” shall be construed accordingly; 
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31-10-2019). 
2. 26th October, 2006, vide Notification No. S.O. 1776(E), dated by 17th October, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3(ii). 

4 
 
(n) “Protection Officer” means an officer appointed by the State Government under                    
sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(o) “protection order” means an order made in terms of section 18; 
(p) “residence order” means an order granted in terms of sub-section (1) of section 19; 
(q) “respondent” means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship 
with the aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved person has sought any relief under this 
Act: 
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage may 
also file a complaint against a relative of the husband or the male partner; 
(r) “service provider” means an entity registered under sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(s) “shared household” means a household where the person aggrieved lives or at any stage has 
lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with the respondent and includes such a                  
household whether owned or tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent, or 
owned or tenanted by either of them in respect of which either the aggrieved person or the respondent 
or both jointly or singly have any right, title, interest or equity and includes such a household which 
may belong to the joint family of which the respondent is a member, irrespective of whether the 
respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title or interest in the shared household; 
(t) “shelter home” means any shelter home as may be notified by the State Government to be a           
shelter home for the purposes of this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 
3. Definition of domestic violence.—For the purposes of this Act, any act, omission or commission 
or conduct of the respondent shall constitute domestic violence in case it— 
(a) harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or well-being, whether mental or 
physical, of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and includes causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, 
verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or 
(b) harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person with a view to coerce her or any 
other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other property or valuable 
security; or 
(c) has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person or any person related to her by any conduct 
mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b); or 
(d) otherwise injures or causes harm, whether physical or mental, to the aggrieved person. 
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(i) “physical abuse” means any act or conduct which is of such a nature as to cause bodily pain, 
harm, or danger to life, limb, or health or impair the health or development of the aggrieved person 
and includes assault, criminal intimidation and criminal force; 
(ii) “sexual abuse” includes any conduct of a sexual nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades or 
otherwise violates the dignity of woman; 
(iii) “verbal and emotional abuse” includes— 
(a) insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and insults or ridicule specially with regard to 
not having a child or a male child; and 
(b) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person in whom the aggrieved person is 
interested; 
(iv) “economic abuse” includes— 
(a) deprivation of all or any economic or financial resources to which the aggrieved person is 
entitled under any law or custom whether payable under an order of a court or otherwise or which 
the aggrieved person requires out of necessity including, but not limited to, household necessities 

5 
 
for the aggrieved person and her children, if any, stridhan, property, jointly or separately owned 
by the aggrieved person, payment of rental related to the shared house hold and maintenance; 
(b) disposal of household effects, any alienation of assets whether movable or immovable, 
valuables, shares, securities, bonds and the like or other property in which the aggrieved person 
has an interest or is entitled to use by virtue of the domestic relationship or which may be 
reasonably required by the aggrieved person or her children or her stridhan or any other property 
jointly or separately held by the aggrieved person; and 
(c) prohibition or restriction to continued access to resources or facilities which the aggrieved 
person is entitled to use or enjoy by virtue of the domestic relationship including access to the 
shared household. 
Explanation II.—For the purpose of determining whether any act, omission, commission or conduct 
of the respondent constitutes “domestic violence” under this section, the overall facts and circumstances 
of the case shall be taken into consideration. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND DUTIES OF PROTECTION OFFICERS, SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC. 
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclusion of liability of informant.—(1) Any person 
who has reason to believe that an act of domestic violence has been, or is being, or is likely to be 
committed, may give information about it to the concerned Protection Officer. 
(2) No liability, civil or criminal, shall be incurred by any person for giving in good faith of 
information for the purpose of sub-section (1). 
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate.—A police officer, Protection 
Officer, service provider or Magistrate who has received a complaint of domestic violence or is otherwise 
present at the place of an incident of domestic violence or when the incident of domestic violence is 
reported to him, shall inform the aggrieved person— 
(a) of her right to make an application for obtaining a relief by way of a protection order, an order 
for monetary relief, a custody order, a residence order, a compensation order or more than one such 
order under this Act; 
(b) of the availability of services of service providers; 
(c) of the availability of services of the Protection Officers; 
(d) of her right to free legal services under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987); 
(e) of her right to file a complaint under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code                     
(45 of 1860), wherever relevant: 
Provided that nothing in this Act shall be construed in any manner as to relieve a police officer 
from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receipt of information as to the commission of 
a cognizable offence. 
6. Duties of shelter homes.—If an aggrieved person or on her behalf a Protection Officer or a service 
provider requests the person in charge of a shelter home to provide shelter to her, such person in charge of 
the shelter home shall provide shelter to the aggrieved person in the shelter home. 
7. Duties of medical facilities.—If an aggrieved person or, on her behalf a Protection Officer or a 
service provider requests the person in charge of a medical facility to provide any medical aid to her, such 
person in charge of the medical facility shall provide medical aid to the aggrieved person in the medical 
facility. 
8. Appointment of Protection Officers.—(1) The State Government shall, by notification, appoint 
such number of Protection Officers in each district as it may consider necessary and shall also notify the 
area or areas within which a Protection Officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred 
on him by or under this Act. 
(2) The Protection Officers shall as far as possible be women and shall possess such qualifications 
and experience as may be prescribed. 

6 
 
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officer and the other officers subordinate to 
him shall be such as may be prescribed. 
9. Duties and functions of Protection Officers.—(1) It shall be the duty of the Protection Officer— 
(a) to assist the Magistrate in the discharge of his functions under this Act; 
(b) to make a domestic incident report to the Magistrate, in such form and in such manner as may 
be prescribed, upon receipt of a complaint of domestic violence and forward copies thereof to the 
police officer in charge of the police station within the local limits of whose jurisdiction domestic 
violence is alleged to have been committed and to the service providers in that area; 
(c) to make an application in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed to the 
Magistrate, if the aggrieved person so desires, claiming relief for issuance of a protection order; 
(d) to ensure that the aggrieved person is provided legal aid under the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and make available free of cost the prescribed form in which a complaint is to 
be made; 
(e) to maintain a list of all service providers providing legal aid or counselling, shelter homes and 
medical facilities in a local area within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate; 
(f) to make available a safe shelter home, if the aggrieved person so requires and forward a copy 
of his report of having lodged the aggrieved person in a shelter home to the police station and the 
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the area where the shelter home is situated; 
(g) to get the aggrieved person medically examined, if she has sustained bodily injuries and 
forward a copy of the medical report to the police station and the Magistrate having jurisdiction in the 
area where the domestic violence is alleged to have been taken place; 
(h) to ensure that the order for monetary relief under section 20 is complied with and executed, in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974); 
(i) to perform such other duties as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Protection Officer shall be under the control and supervision of the Magistrate, and shall 
perform the duties imposed on him by the Magistrate and the Government by, or under, this Act. 
10. Service providers.—(1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, any voluntary 
association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or a company registered 
under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law for the time being in force with the objective 
of protecting the rights and interests of women by any lawful means including providing of legal aid, 
medical, financial or other assistance shall register itself with the State Government as a service provider 
for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) A service provider registered under sub-section (1) shall have the power to— 
(a) record the domestic incident report in the prescribed form if the aggrieved person so desires 
and forward a copy thereof to the Magistrate and the Protection Officer having jurisdiction in the area 
where the domestic violence took place; 
(b) get the aggrieved person medically examined and forward a copy of the medical report to the 
Protection Officer and the police station within the local limits of which the domestic violence took 
place; 
(c) ensure that the aggrieved person is provided shelter in a shelter home, if she so requires and 
forward a report of the lodging of the aggrieved person in the shelter home to the police station within 
the local limits of which the domestic violence took place. 
(3) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any service provider or any 
member of the service provider who is, or who is deemed to be, acting or purporting to act under this Act, 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in the exercise of powers or discharge of 
functions under this Act towards the prevention of the commission of domestic violence. 
11. Duties of Government.—The Central Government and every State Government, shall take all 
measures to ensure that— 

7 
 
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media including the 
television, radio and the print media at regular intervals; 
(b) the Central Government and State Government officers including the police officers and the 
members of the judicial services are given periodic sensitization and awareness training on the issues 
addressed by this Act; 
(c) effective co-ordination between the services provided by concerned Ministries and 
Departments dealing with law, home affairs including law and order, health and human resources to 
address issues of domestic violence is established and periodical review of the same is conducted; 
(d) protocols for the various Ministries concerned with the delivery of services to women under 
this Act including the courts are prepared and put in place. 
CHAPTER IV 
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAININGORDERS OF RELIEFS 
12. Application to Magistrate.—(1) An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other person 
on behalf of the aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking one or more 
reliefs under this Act: 
Provided that before passing any order on such application, the Magistrate shall take into 
consideration any domestic incident report received by him from the Protection Officer or the service 
provider. 
(2) The relief sought for under sub-section (1) may include a relief for issuance of an order for 
payment of compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of such person to institute a suit for 
compensation or damages for the injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by the 
respondent: 
Provided that where a decree for any amount as compensation or damages has been passed by any 
court in favour of the aggrieved person, the amount, if any, paid or payable in pursuance of the order 
made by the Magistrate under this Act shall be set off against the amount payable under such decree and 
the decree shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or 
any other law for the time being in force, be executable for the balance amount, if any, left after such set 
off. 
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and contain such particulars as may 
be prescribed or as nearly as possible thereto. 
(4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing, which shall not ordinarily be beyond three days 
from the date of receipt of the application by the court. 
(5) The Magistrate shall Endeavour to dispose of every application made under sub-section (1) within 
a period of sixty days from the date of its first hearing. 
13. Service of notice.—(1) A notice of the date of hearing fixed under section 12 shall be given by 
the Magistrate to the Protection Officer, who shall get it served by such means as may be prescribed on 
the respondent, and on any other person, as directed by the Magistrate within a maximum period of two 
days or such further reasonable time as may be allowed by the Magistrate from the date of its receipt. 
(2) A declaration of service of notice made by the Protection Officer in such form as may be 
prescribed shall be the proof that such notice was served upon the respondent and on any other person as 
directed by the Magistrate unless the contrary is proved. 
14. Counselling.—(1) The Magistrate may, at any stage of the proceedings under this Act, direct the 
respondent or the aggrieved person, either singly or jointly, to undergo counselling with any member of a 
service provider who possess such qualifications and experience in counselling as may be prescribed. 
(2) Where the Magistrate has issued any direction under sub-section (1), he shall fix the next date of 
hearing of the case within a period not exceeding two months. 

8 
 
15. Assistance of welfare expert.—In any proceeding under this Act, the Magistrate may secure the 
services of such person, preferably a woman, whether related to the aggrieved person or not, including a 
person engaged in promoting family welfare as he thinks fit, for the purpose of assisting him in 
discharging his functions. 
16. Proceedings to be held in camera.—If the Magistrate considers that the circumstances of the 
case so warrant, and if either party to the proceedings so desires, he may conduct the proceedings under 
this Act in camera. 
17. Right to reside in a shared household.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to reside in 
the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in the same. 
(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household or any part of it 
by the respondent save in accordance with the procedure established by law. 
18. Protection orders.—The Magistrate may, after giving the aggrieved person and the respondent 
an opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie satisfied that domestic violence has taken place or 
is likely to take place, pass a protection order in favour of the aggrieved person and prohibit the 
respondent from— 
(a) committing any act of domestic violence; 
(b) aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence; 
(c) entering the place of employment of the aggrieved person or, if the person aggrieved is a 
child, its school or any other place frequented by the aggrieved person; 
(d) attempting to communicate in any form, whatsoever, with the aggrieved person, including 
personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic contact; 
(e) alienating any assets, operating bank lockers or bank accounts used or held or enjoyed by both 
the parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent or singly by the respondent, including 
her stridhan or any other property held either jointly by the parties or separately by them without the 
leave of the Magistrate; 
(f) causing violence to the dependants, other relatives or any person who give the aggrieved 
person assistance from domestic violence; 
(g) committing any other act as specified in the protection order. 
19. Residence orders.—(1) While disposing of an application under sub-section (1) of section12, the 
Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass a residence order— 
(a) restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in any other manner disturbing the 
possession of the aggrieved person from the shared household, whether or not the respondent has a 
legal or equitable interest in the shared household; 
(b) directing the respondent to remove himself from the shared household; 
(c) restraining the respondent or any of his relatives from entering any portion of the shared 
household in which the aggrieved person resides; 
(d) restraining the respondent from alienating or disposing off the shared household or 
encumbering the same; 
(e) restraining the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared household except with the 
leave of the Magistrate; or 
(f) directing the respondent to secure same level of alternate accommodation for the aggrieved 
person as enjoyed by her in the shared household or to pay rent for the same, if the circumstances so 
require: 
Provided that no order under clause (b) shall be passed against any person who is a woman. 
 
 

9 
 
(2) The Magistrate may impose any additional conditions or pass any other direction which he may 
deem reasonably necessary to protect or to provide for the safety of the aggrieved person or any child of 
such aggrieved person. 
(3) The Magistrate may require from the respondent to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for 
preventing the commission of domestic violence. 
(4) An order under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be an order under Chapter VIII of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and shall be dealt with accordingly. 
(5) While passing an order under sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), the court may 
also pass an order directing the officer in charge of the nearest police station to give protection to the 
aggrieved person or to assist her or the person making an application on her behalf in the implementation 
of the order. 
(6) While making an order under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may impose on the respondent 
obligations relating to the discharge of rent and other payments, having regard to the financial needs and 
resources of the parties. 
(7) The Magistrate may direct the officer in-charge of the police station in whose jurisdiction the 
Magistrate has been approached to assist in the implementation of the protection order. 
(8) The Magistrate may direct the respondent to return to the possession of the aggrieved person her 
stridhan or any other property or valuable security to which she is entitled to. 
20. Monetary reliefs.—(1) While disposing of an application under sub-section (1) of section 12, the 
Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the expenses incurred and losses 
suffered by the aggrieved person and any child of the aggrieved person as a result of the domestic 
violence and such relief may include, but not limited to,— 
(a) the loss of earnings; 
(b) the medical expenses; 
(c) the loss caused due to the destruction, damage or removal of any property from the control of 
the aggrieved person; and 
(d) the maintenance for the aggrieved person as well as her children, if any, including an order 
under or in addition to an order of maintenance under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force. 
(2) The monetary relief granted under this section shall be adequate, fair and reasonable and 
consistent with the standard of living to which the aggrieved person is accustomed. 
(3) The Magistrate shall have the power to order an appropriate lump sum payment or monthly 
payments of maintenance, as the nature and circumstances of the case may require. 
(4) The Magistrate shall send a copy of the order for monetary relief made under sub-section (1) to 
the parties to the application and to the in charge of the police station within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the respondent resides. 
(5) The respondent shall pay the monetary relief granted to the aggrieved person within the period 
specified in the order under sub-section (1). 
(6) Upon the failure on the part of the respondent to make payment in terms of the order under                
sub-section (1), the Magistrate may direct the employer or a debtor of the respondent, to directly pay to 
the aggrieved person or to deposit with the court a portion of the wages or salaries or debt due to or 
accrued to the credit of the respondent, which amount may be adjusted towards the monetary relief 
payable by the respondent. 
21. Custody orders.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Magistrate may, at any stage of hearing of the application for protection order or for any other 
relief under this Act grant temporary custody of any child or children to the aggrieved person or the 
person making an application on her behalf and specify, if necessary, the arrangements for visit of such 
child or children by the respondent: 

10 
 
Provided that if the Magistrate is of the opinion that any visit of the respondent may be harmful to the 
interests of the child or children, the Magistrate shall refuse to allow such visit. 
22. Compensation orders.—In addition to other reliefs as may be granted under this Act, the 
Magistrate may on an application being made by the aggrieved person, pass an order directing the 
respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries, including mental torture and emotional 
distress, caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by that respondent. 
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders.—(1) In any proceeding before him under this Act, 
the Magistrate may pass such interim order as he deems just and proper. 
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application prima facie discloses that the respondent is 
committing, or has committed an act of domestic violence or that there is a likelihood that the respondent 
may commit an act of domestic violence, he may grant an ex parte order on the basis of the affidavit in 
such form, as may be prescribed, of the aggrieved person under section 18, section 19, section 20,                  
section 21 or, as the case may be, section 22 against the respondent. 
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost.—The Magistrate shall, in all cases where he has 
passed any order under this Act, order that a copy of such order, shall be given free of cost, to the parties 
to the application, the police officer in-charge of the police station in the jurisdiction of which the 
Magistrate has been approached, and any service provider located within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the court and if any service provider has registered a domestic incident report, to that 
service provider. 
25. Duration and alteration of orders.—(1) A protection order made under section 18 shall be in 
force till the aggrieved person applies for discharge. 
(2) If the Magistrate, on receipt of an application from the aggrieved person or the respondent, is 
satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances requiring alteration, modification or revocation of any 
order made under this Act, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing pass such order, as he may deem 
appropriate. 
26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.—(1) Any relief available under sections 18, 19, 20, 
21 and 22 may also be sought in any legal proceeding, before a civil court, family court or a criminal 
court, affecting the aggrieved person and the respondent whether such proceeding was initiated before or 
after the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Any relief referred to in sub-section (1) may be sought for in addition to and along with any other 
relief that the aggrieved person may seek in such suit or legal proceeding before a civil or criminal court. 
(3) In case any relief has been obtained by the aggrieved person in any proceedings other than a 
proceeding under this Act, she shall be bound to inform the Magistrate of the grant of such relief. 
27. Jurisdiction.—(1) The court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be, within the local limits of which— 
(a) the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily resides or carries on business or is 
employed; or 
(b) the respondent resides or carries on business or is employed; or 
(c) the cause of action has arisen,  
shall be the competent court to grant a protection order and other orders under this Act and to try offences 
under this Act. 
(2) Any order made under this Act shall be enforceable throughout India. 
28. Procedure.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all proceedings under sections 12,18,      
19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 and offences under section 31 shall be governed by the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the court from laying down its own procedure for disposal 
of an application under section 12 or under sub-section (2) of section 23. 

11 
 
29. Appeal.—There shall lie an appeal to the Court of Session within thirty days from the date on 
which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggrieved person or the respondent, as the case 
may be, whichever is later. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30. Protection Officers and members of service providers to be public servants.—The Protection 
Officers and members of service providers, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within 
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
31. Penalty for breach of protection order by respondent.—(1) A breach of protection order, or of 
an interim protection order, by the respondent shall be an offence under this Act and shall be punishable 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) The offence under sub-section (1) shall as far as practicable be tried by the Magistrate who had 
passed the order, the breach of which has been alleged to have been caused by the accused. 
(3) While framing charges under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may also frame charges under section 
498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other provision of that Code or the Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961), as the case may be, if the facts disclose the commission of an offence under those 
provisions. 
32. Cognizance and proof.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offence under sub-section (1) of section 31 shall be cognizable and                  
non-bailable. 
(2) Upon the sole testimony of the aggrieved person, the court may conclude that an offence under 
sub-section (1) of section 31 has been committed by the accused. 
33. Penalty for not discharging duty by Protection Officer.—If any Protection Officer fails or 
refuses to discharge his duties as directed by the Magistrate in the protection order without any sufficient 
cause, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both. 
34. Cognizance of offence committed by Protection Officer.—No prosecution or other legal 
proceeding shall lie against the Protection Officer unless a complaint is filed with the previous sanction of 
the State Government or an officer authorised by it in this behalf. 
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Protection Officer for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
36. Act not in derogation of any other law.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law, for the time being in force. 
37. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the qualifications and experience which a Protection Officer shall possess under                     
sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officers and the other officers 
subordinate to him, under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(c) the form and manner in which a domestic incident report may be made under clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 9; 
(d) the form and the manner in which an application for protection order may be made to the 
Magistrate under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9; 

12 
 
(e) the form in which a complaint is to be filed under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9; 
(f) the other duties to be performed by the Protection Officer under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of 
section 9; 
(g) the rules regulating registration of service providers under sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(h) the form in which an application under sub-section (1) of section 12 seeking reliefs under this 
Act may be made and the particulars which such application shall contain under sub-section (3) of 
that section; 
(i) the means of serving notices under sub-section (1) of section 13; 
(j) the form of declaration of service of notice to be made by the Protection Officer under                     
sub-section (2) of section 13; 
(k) the qualifications and experience in counselling which a member of the service provider shall 
possess under sub-section (1) of section 14; 
(l) the form in which an affidavit may be filed by the aggrieved person under sub-section (2) of 
section 23; 
(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
 


================================================================================
  📄 Guardians and Wards Act.pdf
     Pages: 17
================================================================================
1 
 
THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890 
______ 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
______ 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Title, extent and commencement. 
2. [Repealed.]. 
3. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts of Wards and Chartered High Courts. 
4. Definitions. 
4A. Power to confer jurisdiction on subordinate judicial officers and to transfer proceedings 
    to such officers. 
CHAPTER II 
APPOINTMENT AND DECLARATION OF GUARDIANS 
5. [Omitted.]. 
6. Saving of power to appoint in other cases. 
7. Power of the Court to make order as to guardianship. 
8. Persons entitled to apply for order. 
9. Court having jurisdiction to entertain application. 
10. Form of application. 
11. Procedure on admission of application. 
12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and interim protection of 
    person and property. 
13. Hearing of evidence before making of order. 
14. Simultaneous proceedings in different Courts. 
15. Appointment or declaration of several guardians. 
16. Appointment or declaration of guardian for property beyond jurisdiction of the Court. 
17. Matters to be considered by the Court in appointing guardian. 
18. Appointment or declaration of Collector in virtue of office.  
19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases. 

2 
 
CHAPTER III 
DUTIES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF GUARDIANS 
General 
SECTIONS 
20. Fiduciary relation of guardian to ward. 
21. Capacity of minors to act as guardians. 
22. Remuneration of guardian. 
23. Control of Collector as guardian. 
Guardian of the person 
24. Duties of guardian of the person. 
25. Title of guardian to custody of ward. 
26. Removal of war from jurisdiction. 
Guardian of property 
27.  Duties of guardian of property. 
28. Powers of testamentary guardian. 
29. Limitation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court. 
30. Voidability of transfers made in contravention of section 28 or section 29. 
31. Practice with respect to permitting transfers under section 29. 
32. Variation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court. 
33. Right of guardian so appointed or declared to apply to the Court for opinion in management of 
property, of ward. 
34. Obligations on guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court.  
34A. Power to award remuneration for auditing accounts. 
35. Suit against guardian where administration-bond was taken. 
36. Suit against guardian where administration-bond was not taken. 
37. General liability of guardian as trustee. 
Termination of guardianship 
38. Right of survivorship among joint guardians. 
39. Removal of guardian. 
40. Discharge of guardian. 
41. Cessation of authority of guardian. 
42. Appointment of successor to guardian dead, discharged or removed. 
CHAPTER IV 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
43. Orders for regulating conduct or proceedings of guardians, and enforcement of those orders. 
44. Penalty for removal of ward from jurisdiction. 

3 
 
SECTIONS 
45. Penalty for contumacy. 
46. Reports by Collectors and subordinate Courts. 
47. Orders appealable. 
48. Finality of other orders. 
49. Costs. 
50. Power of High Court to make rules. 
51. Applicability of Act to guardians already appointed by Court. 
52. [Repealed.]. 
53. [Repealed.]. 
THE SCHEDULE. — [Repealed.]. 

4 
 
THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890  
ACT NO. 8 OF 18901 
[21st March, 1890.] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Guardian and Ward. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to guardian and ward; It is 
hereby enacted as follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY 
1. Title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***, 
3* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
 
4*** 
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1890. 
2. [Repeal.] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule. 
3. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts of Wards and Chartered High Courts.— This Act shall be 
read subject to every enactment heretofore or hereafter passed relating to any Court of Wards by 5[any 
competent legislature, authority or person in 6[any State to which this Act extends]], and nothing in 
this Act shall be construed to affect, or in any way derogate from the jurisdiction or authority of any 
Court of Wards, or to take away any power possessed by 7[any High Court 8***]. 
4. Definitions.— In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or                    
context,— 
(1) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875, (9 of 
1875) is to be deemed not to have attained his majority: 
(2) “guardian” mean’s a person having the care of the person of a minor or of his property, or of 
both is person and property: 
(3) “ward” means a minor for whose person or property, or both, there is a guardian: 
(4) “District Court” has the meaning assigned to that expression in the 9 Code of Civil               
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I, to the whole of the Union 
territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. and to Sikkim vide Notifn. No. S.O. 644(E), dated 24-81984, 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, s. 3(ii) (w.e.f. 1-9-1984). 
This Act has been extended to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, with the following modification: 
In section 1, after sub-section (2), insert:— 
“Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of 
Pondicherry.”. 
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule 
    (w.e.f. 31-10- 2019). 
3. The words “inclusive of British Baluchistan” rep by A.O. 1948. 
4. The word “and” omitted by Act 40 of 1949, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G.G. in C., or by a Governor or Lieutenant-Governor in Council”.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “Part A States and Part C States”. 
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “any High Court established under the Statute 24 and 25 Victoria, Ch. 104 (an Act 
for establishing High Courts of Judicature in India)”. 
8. The words “established in Part A States and Part C States” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
9. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  

5 
 
Procedure (14 of 1882), and includes a High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction: 
1[(5) “the Court” means—  
(a) the District Court having jurisdiction to entertain an application under this                   
Act for an order appointing or declaring a person to be a guardian; or 
(b) where a guardian has been appointed or declared in pursuance of any such application—  
(i) the Court which, or the Court of the officer who, appointed or declared the guardian or 
is under this Act deemed to have appointed or declared the guardian; or 
(ii) in any matter relating to the person of the ward the District Court having jurisdiction 
in the place where the ward for the time being ordinarily resides; or 
(c) in respect of any proceeding transferred under section 4A, the Court of the officer to 
whom such proceeding has been transferred:] 
(6) “Collector” means the chief officer in charge of the revenue—administration of a district, 
and includes any officer whom the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, may, 
by name or in virtue of his office, appoint to be a Collector in any local area, or with respect to any 
class of persons, for all or any of the purposes of this Act: 
2* 
    
 
*  
 
 
* 
 
 
*; and 
(8) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made by the High Court under this Act. 
3 [4A. Power to confer jurisdiction on subordinate judicial officers and to transfer 
proceedings to such officers.—(1) The High Court may, by general or special order, empower any 
officer exercising original civil jurisdiction subordinate to a District Court, or authorise the Judge of 
any District Court to empower any such officer subordinate to him, to dispose of any proceedings 
under this Act transferred to such officer under the provisions of this section. 
(2) The Judge of a District Court may, by order in writing, transfer at any stage any proceeding 
under this Act pending in his Court for disposal to any officer subordinate to him empowered under 
sub-section (1). 
(3) The Judge of a District Court may at any stage transfer to his own Court or to any officer 
subordinate to him empowered under sub-section (1) any proceeding under this Act pending in the 
Court of any other such officer. 
(4) When any proceedings are transferred under this section in any case in which a guardian has 
been appointed or declared, the Judge of the District Court may, by order in writing, declare that the 
Court of the Judge or officer to whom they are transferred shall, for all or any of the purposes of this 
Act, be deemed to be the Court which appointed or declared the guardian.] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 2, for the clause (5). 
2. Clause (7) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule. 
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 3. 

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
APPOINTMENT AND DECLARATION OF GUARDIANS 
5. [Power of parents to appoint in case of European British subjects.] Omitted by the Part B States 
(Laws) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), s. 3 and Schedule. 
6. Saving of power to appoint in other cases.—In the case of a minor 1***, nothing in this Act 
shall be construed to take away or derogate from any power to appoint a guardian of his person or 
property, or both, which is valid by the law to which the minor is subject. 
7. Power of the Court to make order as to guardianship.—(1) where the Court is satisfied that 
it is for the welfare of a minor that an order should be made—  
(a) appointing a guardian of his person or property, or both, or 
(b) declaring a person to be such a guardian,  
the Court may make an order accordingly. 
(2) An order under this section shall imply the removal of any guardian who has not been 
appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by the Court. 
(3) Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by 
the Court, an order under this section appointing or declaring another person to be guardian in his 
stead shall not be made until the powers of the guardian appointed or declared as aforesaid have 
ceased under the provisions of this Act. 
8. Persons entitled to apply for order.—An order shall not be made under the last foregoing 
section except on the application of—  
(a) the person desirous of  being, or claiming to be, the guardian of the minor, or 
(b) any relative or friend of the minor, or 
(c) the Collector of the district or other local area within which the minor ordinarily resides or 
in which he has property, or 
(d) the Collector having authority with respect to the class to which the minor belongs. 
9. Court having jurisdiction to entertain application.—(1) If the application is with respect to 
the guardianship of the person of the minor, it shall be made to the District Court having jurisdiction 
in the place where the minor ordinarily resides. 
(2) If the application is with respect to the guardianship of the property of the minor, it may be 
made either to the District Court having jurisdiction in the place where the minor ordinarily resides or 
to a District Court having jurisdiction in a place where he has property. 
(3) If an application with respect to the guardianship of the property of a minor is made to a 
District Court other than that having jurisdiction in the place where the minor ordinarily resides, the 
Court may return the application if in its opinion the application would be disposed of more justly or 
conveniently by any other District Court having jurisdiction. 
10. Form of application.—(1) If the application is not made by the Collector, it shall be by 
petition signed and verified in manner prescribed by the 2Code ,of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) for 
the signing and verification of a plaint, and stating, so far as can be ascertained—  
(a) the name, sex, religion, date of birth and ordinary residence of the minor; 
(b) where the minor is a female, whether she is married, and, if so, the name and age of her 
husband; 
(c) the nature, situation and approximate value of the property, if any, of the minor; 
                                                      
1. The words “who is not an European British subject” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule. 
2. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908). 

7 
 
(d) the name and residence of the person having the custody or possession of the person or 
property of the minor; 
(e) what near relations the minor has, and where they reside; 
(f) whether a guardian of the person or property, or both, of the minor has been appointed by 
any person entitled or claiming to be entitled by the law to which the minor is subject to make such 
an appointment; 
(g) whether an application has at any time been made to the Court or to any other Court with 
respect to the guardianship of the person or property, or both, of the minor, and, if so, when, to 
what Court and with what result; 
(h) whether the application is for the appointment or declaration of a guardian of the person of 
the minor, or of his property, or of both; 
(i) where the application is to appoint a guardian, the qualifications of the proposed guardian; 
(j) where the application is to declare a person to be a guardian, the grounds on which that 
person claims; 
(k) the causes which have led to the making of the applications; and 
(l) such other particulars, if any, as may be prescribed or as the nature of the application renders 
it necessary to state. 
(2) If the application is made by the Collector, it shall be by letter addressed to the Court and 
forwarded by post or in such other manner as may be found convenient, and shall state as far as 
possible the particulars mentioned in sub-section (1). 
(3) The application must be accompanied by a declaration of the willingness of the proposed 
guardian to act and the declaration must be signed by him and attested by at least two 
witnesses. 
11. Procedure on admission of application.—(1) If the Court is satisfied that there is ground 
for proceeding on the application, it shall fix a day for the hearing thereof, and cause notice of the 
application and of the date fixed for the hearing— 
(a) to be served in the manner directed in the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) on—  
(i) the parents of the minor if they arc residing in 2[any State to which this Act extends], 
(ii) the person, if any, named in the petition or letter as having the custody or possession of 
the person or property of the minor, 
(iii) the person proposed in the application or letter to be appointed or declared guardian, 
unless that person is himself the applicant, and 
(iv) any other person to whom, in the opinion of the Court, special notice of the application 
should be given; and 
(b) to be posted on some conspicuous part of the court-house, and of the residence of the minor, 
and otherwise published in such manner as the Court, subject to any rules made by the High Court 
under this Act, thinks fit. 
(2) The State Government may, by general or special order, require that, when any part of the 
property described in a petition under section 10, sub-section (1), is land of which a Court of Wards 
could assume the superintendence, the Court shall also cause a notice as aforesaid to be served on the 
Collector in whose district the minor ordinarily resides, and on 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.   

8 
 
every Collector in whose district any portion of the land is situate, and the Collector may cause the 
notice to be published in any manner he deems fit. 
(3) No charge shall be made by the Court or the Collector for the service or publication of any 
notice served or published under sub-section (2). 
12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and interim protection of 
person and property.—(1) The Court may direct that the person, if any, having the custody of the 
minor shall produce him or cause him to be produced at such place and time and before such person 
as it appoints, and may make such order for the temporary custody and protection of the person or 
property of the minor as it thinks proper. 
(2) If the minor is a female who ought not to be compelled to appear in public, the direction under 
sub-section (1) for her production shall require her to be produced in accordance with the customs and 
manners of the country. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall authorise—  
(a) the Court to place a female minor in the temporary custody of a person claiming to be her 
guardian on the ground of his being her husband, unless she is already in his custody with the 
consent of her parents, if any, or 
(b) any person to whom the temporary custody and protection of the property of a minor is 
entrusted to dispossess otherwise than by due course of law any person in possession of any of the 
property. 
13. Hearing of evidence before making of order.—On the day fixed for the hearing of the 
application, or as soon afterwards as may be, the Court shall hear such evidence as may be adduced in 
support of or in opposition to the application. 
14. Simultaneous proceedings in different Courts.—(1) If proceedings for the appointment or 
declaration of a guardian of a minor arc taken in more Courts than one, each of those Courts shall, on 
being apprised of the proceedings in the other Court or Courts, stay the proceedings before itself. 
(2) If the Courts arc both or all subordinate to the same High Court, they shall report the case to the 
High Court, and the High Court shall determine in which of the Courts the proceedings with respect to 
the appointment or declaration of a guardian of the minor shall be had. 
1[(3) In any other case in which proceedings arc stayed under. sub-section (1), the Courts shall 
report the case to, and be guided by such orders as they may receive from, their respective State 
Governments] 
15. Appointment or declaration of several guardians.—(1) If the law to which the minor is 
subject admits of his having two or more joint guardians of his person or property, or both, the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, appoint or declare them. 
2* 
 
 
*       
               
* 
 
            * 
 
             *       
(4) Separate guardians may be appointed or declared of the person and of the property of a minor. 
(5) If a minor has several properties, the Court may, if it thinks fit, appoint or declare a separate 
guardian for any one or more of the properties. 
16. Appointment or declaration of guardian for property beyond jurisdiction of the  
Court.—If the Court appoints or declares a guardian for any property situate beyond the                
local limits of its jurisdiction, the Court having jurisdiction in the place where the
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for sub-section (3).    
2. Sub-sections (2) and (3) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule. 

9 
 
property is situate shall, on production of a certified copy of the order appointing or declaring the 
guardian, accept him as duly appointed or declared and give effect to the order. 
17. Matters to be considered by the Court in appointing guardian.—(1) In appointing or 
declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be guided 
by what, consistently with the law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances to be 
for the welfare of the minor. 
(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court shall have regard to the age, 
sex and religion of the minor, the character and capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness of 
kin to the minor, the wishes, if any, of a deceased parent, and any existing or previous relations of the 
proposed guardian with the minor or his property. 
(3) If the minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference, the Court may consider that 
preference. 
1* 
 
 
  * 
 
 
   * 
 
 
* 
 
            * 
(5) The Court shall not appoint or declare any person to be a guardian against his will. 
18. Appointment or declaration of Collector in virtue of office.—Where a Collector is 
appointed or declared by the Court in virtue of his office to be guardian of the person or property, or 
both, of a minor, the order appointing or declaring him shall be deemed to authorize and require the 
person for the time being holding the office to act as guardian of the minor with respect to his person 
or property, or both, as the case may be. 
19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases.—Nothing in this Chapter shall 
authorise the Court to appoint or declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is 
under the superintendence of a Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian of the person—  
(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not, in the opinion of the Court, 
unfit to be guardian of her person, or 
2[(b) of a minor, other than a married female, whose father or mother is living and is not, in the 
opinion of the court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or.] 
(c) of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a Court of Wards competent to 
appoint a guardian of the person of the minor. 
CHAPTER III 
DUTIES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF GUARDIANS 
General 
20.  Fiduciary relation of guardian to ward.—(1) A guardian stands in a fiduciary relation to his 
ward, and, save as provided by the will or other instrument, if any, by which he was appointed, or by 
this Act, he must not make any profit out of his office. 
(2) The fiduciary relation of it guardian to his ward extends to and affects purchases by the 
guardian of the property of the ward, and by the ward of the property of the guardian, immediately or 
soon after the ward has ceased to be a minor, and generally all transactions between them while the 
influence of the guardian still lasts or is recent. 
21. Capacity of minors to act as guardians.—A minor is incompetent to act as guardian of any 
minor except his own wife or child or where he is the managing member of an undivided Hindu 
family, the wife  or child of another minor Member of that family.  
                                                      
1. Sub-section (4) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule. 
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2010, s. 2 for sub-clause (b) (w.e.f. 31-8-2010). 

10 
 
22. Remuneration of guardian.—(1) A guardian appointed or declared by the Court shall be 
entitled to such allowance, if any, as the Court thinks fit for his care and paints in the execution of his 
duties. 
(2) When an officer of the Government, as such officer, is so appointed or declared to be guardian, 
such fees shall be paid to the Government out of the property of the ward as the State Government, by 
general or special order, directs. 
23. Control of Collector as guardian.—A Collector appointed or declared by the Court to be 
guardian of the person or property, or both, of a minor shall, in all matters connected with the 
guardianship of his ward, be subject to the control of the State Government or of such authority as that 
Government, by 1notification in the Official Gazette, appoints in this behalf. 
Guardian of the person 
24. Duties of guardian of the person.—A guardian of the person of a ward is charged with 
the custody of the ward and must look to his support, health and education, and such other matters as 
the law to which the ward is subject requires. 
25. Title of guardian to custody of ward.—(1) If a ward leaves or is removed from the custody 
of a guardian of his person, the Court, if it is of opinion that it will be for the welfare of the ward to 
return to the custody of his guardian, may make an order for his return, and for the purpose of 
enforcing the order may cause the ward to be arrested and to be delivered into the custody of the 
guardian. 
(2) For the purpose of arresting the ward, the Court may exercise the power conferred on a 
Magistrate of the first class by section 100 of the 2Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882). 
(3) The residence of a ward against the will of his guardian with a person who is not his guardian 
does not of itself terminate the guardianship. 
26. Removal of ward from jurisdiction.—(1) A guardian of the person appointed or declared 
by the Court unless he is the Collector or is a guardian appointed by will or other instrument, shall 
not, without the leave of the Court by which he was appointed or declared, remove the ward from 
the limits of its jurisdiction except for such purposes as may be prescribed. 
(2) The leave granted by the Court under sub-section (1) may be special or general, and may be 
defined by the order granting it. 
Guardian of property 
27. Duties of guardian of property.—A guardian of the property of a ward is bound to deal 
therewith as carefully as a man of ordinary prudence would deal with it if it were his own, and, 
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, he may do all acts which are reasonable and proper for the 
realisation, protection or benefit of the property. 
28. Powers of testamentary guardian.—Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other 
instrument, his power to mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, 
immovable property belonging to his ward is subject to any restriction which may be imposed by the 
instrument, unless he has under this Act been declared guardian and the Court which made die 
declaration permits him by an order in writing, notwithstanding the restriction, to dispose of any 
immovable property specified in the order in a manner permitted by the order. 
29. Limitation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the 
Court.—Where a person other than a Collector, or than a guardian appointed by will or other 
                                                      
1. For notifications appointing authorities to whose control Collectors appointed under the Act shall be subject, see different 
local R. & O. 
2. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898). 
 

11 
 
instrument, has been appointed or declared by the Court to be guardian of the property of a ward, he 
shall not, without the previous permission of the Court,—  
(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, any part of the 
immovable property of his ward, or 
(b) lease any part of that property for a term exceeding five years or for any term extending 
more than one year beyond the date on which the ward will cease to be a minor. 
30. Viodability of transfers made in contravention of section 28 or section 29.—A disposal of 
immovable property by a guardian in contravention of either of the two last foregoing sections is 
voidable at the instance of any other person affected thereby. 
31. Practice with respect to permitting transfers under section 29.—(1) Permission to the 
guardian to do any of the acts mentioned in section 29 shall not be granted by the Court except in case 
of necessity or for an evident advantage to the ward. 
(2) The order granting the permission shall recite the necessity or advantage, as the case may 
be, describe the property with respect to which the act permitted is to be done, and specify such 
conditions, if any, as the Court may see fit to attach to the permission; and it shall be recorded, 
dated and signed by the Judge of the Court with his own hand, or, when from any cause he is 
prevented from recording the order with his own hand, shall be taken down in writing from his 
dictation and be dated and signed by him. 
(3) The Court may in its discretion attach to the permission the following among other conditions, 
namely:—  
(a) that a sale shall not be completed without the sanction of the Court; 
(b) that a sale shall be made to the highest bidder by public auction, before the Court or 
some person specially appointed by the Court for that purpose, at a time and place to be 
specified by the Court, after such proclamation of the intended sale as the Court, subject to 
any rules made under this Act by the High Court, directs; 
(c) that a lease shall not be made in consideration of a premium or shall be made for such term 
of years and subject to such rents and covenants as the Court directs; 
(d) that the whole or any part of the proceeds of the act permitted shall be paid into the 
Court by the guardian, to be disbursed therefrom or to be invested by the Court on 
prescribed securities or to be otherwise disposed of as the Court directs. 
(4) Before granting permission to a guardian to do an act mentioned in section 29, the Court 
may cause notice of the application for the permission to be given to any relative or friend of the 
ward who should, in its opinion, receive notice thereof, and shall hear and record the statement of 
any person who appears in opposition to the application. 
32. Variation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court.—
Where a guardian of the property of a ward has been appointed or declared by the Court and such 
guardian is not the Collector, the Court may, from time to time, by order, define, restrict or extend 
his powers with respect to the property of the ward in such manner and to such extent as it may 
consider to be for the advantage of the ward and consistent with the law to which the ward is 
subject. 
33. Right of guardian so appointed or declared to apply to the Court for opinion in 
management of property of ward.—(1) A guardian appointed or declared by the Court may 
apply by petition to the Court which appointed or declared him for its opinion, advice or direction 
on any present question respecting the management or administration of the property of his ward. 
(2) If the Court considers the question to be proper for summary disposal, it shall cause a copy of 
the petition to be served on, and the hearing thereof may be attended by, such of the persons interested 
in the application as the Court thinks fit. 

12 
 
(3) The guardian stating in good faith the facts in the petition and acting upon the opinion, advice 
or direction given by the Court shall be deemed, so far as regards his own responsibility, to have 
performed his duty as guardian in the subject-matter of the application. 
34. Obligations on guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court.—Where a 
guardian of the property of a ward has been appointed or declared by the Court and such guardian is 
not the Collector, he shall,—  
(a) if so required by the Court, give a bond, as nearly as may be in the prescribed form, to the 
Judge of the Court to ensure for the benefit of the Judge for the time being, with or without 
sureties, as may be prescribed, engaging duly to account for what he may receive in respect of the 
property of the ward; 
(b) if so required by the Court, deliver to the Court, within six months from the date of his 
appointment or declaration by the Court, or within such other time as the Court directs, a statement 
of the immovable property belonging to the ward, of the money and other movable property which 
he has received on behalf of the ward up to the date of delivering the statement, and of the debts 
due on that date to or from the ward; 
(c) if so required by the Court, exhibit his accounts in the Court at such times and in such form 
as the Court from time to time directs; 
(e) if so required by the Court, pay into the Court at such time as the Court directs the balance 
due from him on those accounts, or so much thereof as the Court directs; and 
(f) apply for the maintenance, education and advancement of the ward and of such persons as 
are dependent on him, and for the celebration of ceremonies to which the ward or any of those 
persons may be a party, such portion of the income of the property of the ward as the Court from 
time to time directs, and, if the Court so directs, the whole or any part of that property. 
1[34A. Power to award remuneration for auditing accounts.—When accounts are exhibited by 
a guardian of the property of a ward in pursuance of a requisition made under clause (c) of section 34 
or otherwise, the Court may appoint a person to audit the accounts, and may direct that remuneration 
for the work be paid out of the income of the property.] 
35. Suit against guardian where administration bond was taken.—Where a guardian appointed 
or declared by the Court has given a bond duly to account for what he may receive in respect of the 
property of his ward, the Court may, on application made by petition and on being satisfied that the 
engagement of the bond has not been kept, and upon such terms as to security, or providing that any 
money received be paid into the Court, or otherwise as the Court thinks fit, assign the bond to some 
proper person, who shall thereupon be entitled to sue on the bond in his own name as if the bond had 
been originally given to him instead of to the Judge of the Court, and shall be entitled to recover 
thereon, as trustee for the ward, in respect of any breach thereof. 
36. Suit against guardian where administration bond was not taken.—(1) Where a guardian 
appointed or declared by the Court has not given a bond as aforesaid, any person, with the leave of the 
Court, may, as next friend, at any time during the continuance of the minority of the ward, and upon 
such terms as aforesaid, institute a suit against the guardian, or, in case of his death, against his 
representative, for an account of what the guardian has received in respect of the property of the ward, 
and may recover in the suit, as trustee for the ward, such amount as may be found to be payable by the 
guardian or his representative, as the case may be. 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1929, s. 2. 

13 
 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as they relate to a suit against a guardian, be 
subject to the provisions of section 440 of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) as amended by 
this Act1. 
37. General liability of guardian as trustee.—Nothing in either of the two last foregoing sections 
shall be construed to deprive a ward or his representative of any remedy against his guardian, or the 
representative of the guardian, which, not being expressly provided in either of those sections, any 
other beneficiary or his representative would have against his trustee or the representative of the 
trustee. 
Termination of guardianship 
38. Right of survivorship among joint guardians.—On the death of one of two or more joint 
guardians, the guardianship continues to the survivor or survivors until a further appointment is made 
by the Court. 
39. Removal of guardian. —The Court may, on the application of any person interested, or of its 
own motion, remove a guardian appointed or declared by the Court, or a guardian appointed by will or 
other instrument, for any of the following causes, namely:—  
(a) for abuse of his trust; 
(b) for continued failure to perform the duties of his trust; 
(c) for incapacity to perform the duties of his trust; 
(d) for ill-treatment, or neglect to take proper care, of his ward; 
(e) for contumacious disregard of any provision of this Act or of any order of the Court; 
(f) for conviction of an offence implying, in the opinion of the Court, a defect of character 
which unfits him to be the guardian of his ward; 
(g) for having an interest adverse to the faithful performance of his duties; 
(h) for ceasing to reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court; 
(i) in the case of a guardian of the property, for bankruptcy or insolvency; 
(j) by reason of the guardianship of the guardian ceasing, or being liable to cease, under the law 
to which the minor is subject: 
Provided that a guardian appointed by will or other instrument, whether he has been declared 
under this Act or not, shall not be removed—  
(a) for the cause mentioned in clause (g) unless the adverse interest accrued after the death of 
the person who appointed him, or it is shown that that person made and maintained the 
appointment in ignorance of the existence of the adverse interest, or 
(b) for the cause mentioned in clause (h) unless such guardian has taken up such a residence as, 
in the opinion of the Court, renders it impracticable for him to discharge the functions of guardian. 
40. Discharge of guardian.—(1) If a guardian appointed or declared by the Court desires to resign 
his office, he may apply to the Court to be discharged. 
(2) If the Court finds that there is sufficient reason for the application, it shall discharge him, and if 
the guardian making the application is the Collector and the State Government approves of his 
applying to be discharged, the Court shall in any case discharge him. 
41. Cessation of authority of guardian.—(1) The powers of a guardian of the person cease—  
(a) by his death, removal or discharge; 
(b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence of the person of the ward; 
 
                                                      
1. See now Order XXXII, rules 1 and 4(2), in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 
1908). 

14 
 
(c) by the ward ceasing to be a minor; 
(d) in the case of a female ward, by her marriage to a husband who is not unfit to be guardian of 
her person or, if the guardian was appointed or declared by the Court, by her marriage to a husband 
who is not, in the opinion of the Court, so unfit; or 
(e) in the case of a ward whose father was unfit to be guardian of the person of the ward, by the 
father ceasing to be so or, if the father was deemed by the Court to be so unfit, by his ceasing to be 
so in the opinion of the Court. 
(2) The powers of a guardian of the property cease—  
(a) by his death, removal or discharge; 
(b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence of the property of the ward; or 
(c) by the ward ceasing to be a minor. 
(3) When for any cause the powers of a guardian cease, the Court may require him or, if he is dead, 
his representative to deliver as it directs any property in his possession or control belonging to the 
ward or any accounts in his possession or control relating to any past or present property of the ward. 
(4) When he has delivered the property or accounts as required by the Court, the Court may 
declare him to be discharged from his liabilities save as regards any fraud which may subsequently be 
discovered. 
42. Appointment to successor to guardian dead, discharged or removed.—When a guardian 
appointed or declared by the Cowl is discharged, or, under the law to which the ward is subject, 
ceases to be entitled to act, or when any such guardian or a guardian appointed by will or other 
instrument is removed or dies, the Court, of its own motion or on application under Chapter II, may, if 
the ward is still a minor, appoint or declare another guardian of his person or property, or both, as the 
case may be. 
CHAPTER IV 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
43. Orders for regulating conduct or proceedings of guardians, and enforcement of those 
orders.—(1) The Court may, on the application of any person interested or of its own motion, make 
an order regulating the conduct or proceedings of any guardian appointed or declared by the Court. 
(2) Where there are more guardians than one of a ward, and they are unable to agree upon a 
question affecting his welfare, any of them may apply to the Court for its direction, and the Court may 
make such order respecting the matter in difference as it thinks fit. 
(3) Except where it appears that the object of making an order under sub-section (1) or                 
sub-section (2) would be defeated by the delay, the Court shall, before making the order, direct notice 
of the application therefor or of the intention of the Court to make it, as the case may be, to be given, 
in a case under sub-section (1), to the guardian or, in a case under sub-section (2), to the guardian who 
has not made the application 
(4) In case of disobedience to an order made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the order 
may be enforced in the same manner as an injunction granted under section 492 or section 493 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), in a case under sub-section (1), as if the ward were the plaintiff 
and the guardian were the defendant or, in a case under sub-section (2), as if the guardian who made 
the application were the plaintiff and the other guardian were the defendant. 

15 
 
 (5) Except in a case under sub-section (2), nothing in this section shall apply to a Collector who is, 
as such, a guardian. 
44. Penalty for removal of ward from jurisdiction.—If, for the purpose or with the effect of 
preventing the Court from exercising its authority with respect to a ward, a guardian appointed or 
declared by the Court removes the ward from the limits of the jurisdiction of the Court in 
contravention of the provisions of section 26, he shall be liable, by order of the Court, to find not 
exceeding one thousand rupees, or to imprisonment in the civil jail for a term which may extend to six 
months. 
45. Penalty for contumacy.—(1) In the following cases, namely:—  
(a) if a person having the custody of a minor fails to produce him or cause him to be produced 
in compliance with a direction under section 12, sub-section (1), or to do his utmost to compel the 
minor to return to the custody of his guardian in obedience to an order under section 25,                       
sub-section (1), or 
(b) if a guardian appointed or declared by the Court fails to deliver to the Court, within the time 
allowed by or under clause (b) of section 34, a statement required under that clause, or to exhibit 
accounts in compliance with a requisition under clause (c) of that section, or to pay into the Court 
the balance due from him on those accounts in compliance with a requisition under clause (d) of 
that section, or 
(c) if a person who has ceased to be a guardian, or the representative of such a person, fails to 
deliver any property or accounts in compliance with a requisition under section 41, sub-section (3), 
the person, guardian or representative, as the case may be, shall be liable, by order of the Court, to 
fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, and in case of recusancy to further fine not exceeding ten 
rupees for each day after the first during which the default continues, and not exceeding five hundred 
rupees in the aggregate, and to detention in the civil jail until he undertakes to produce the minor or 
cause him to be produced, or to compel his return, or to deliver the statement, or to exhibit the 
accounts, or to pay the balance, or to deliver the property or accounts, as the case may be. 
(2) If a person who has been released from detention on giving an undertaking under                   
sub-section (1) fails to carry out the undertaking within the time allowed by the Court, the Court may 
cause him to be arrested and re-committed to the civil jail. 
46. Reports by Collectors and subordinate Courts.—(1) The Court may call upon the Collector, 
or upon any court subordinate to the Court, for a report on any matter arising in any proceeding under 
this Act and treat the report as evidence. 
(2) For the purpose of preparing the report the Collector or the Judge of the subordinate Court as 
the case may be, shall make such inquiry as he deems necessary, and may for the pruposes of the 
inquiry exercise any power of compelling the attendance of a witness to give evidence or produce a 
document which is conferred on a Court by the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882). 
47. Orders appealable.— An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order made by a 2*** 
Court,—  
(a) under section 7, appointing or declaring or refusing to appoint or declare a guardian; or, 
(b) under section 9, sub-section (3), returning an application ; or, 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908). 
2. The word “District” rep. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 4. 

16 
 
(c) under section 25, making or refusing to make an order for the return of a ward to the 
custody of his guardian; or, 
(d) under section 26, refusing leave for, the removal of award from the limits of the jurisdiction 
of the Court, or imposing conditions with respect thereto; or, 
(e) under section 28 or section 29, refusing permission to a guardian to do an act referred to in 
the section; or, 
(f) under section 32, defining, restricting or extending the powers of a guardian ; or, 
(g) under section 39, removing a guardian ; or, 
(h) under section 40, refusing to discharge a guardian; or, 
(i) under section 43, regulating the conduct or proceedings of a guardian or settling a matter in 
difference between joint guardians, or enforcing the order ; or, 
(j) under section 44 or section 45, imposing a penalty. 
48. Finality of other orders.—Save as provided by the last foregoing section and by 1section 622 
of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), an order made under this Act shall be final and shall not 
be liable to be contested by suit or otherwise. 
49. Costs.—The costs of any proceeding under this Act, including the costs of maintaining a 
guardian or other person in the civil jail, shall, subject to any rules made by the High Court under this 
Act, be in the discretion of the Court in which the proceeding is had. 
50. Power of High Court to make rules.—(1) In addition to any other power to make rules 
conferred expressly or impliedly by this Act, the High Court may from time to time make rules 
consistent with this Act—  
(a) as to the matters respecting which, and the time at which, reports should be called for from 
Collectors and subordinate Courts; 
(b) as to the allowances to be granted to, and the security to be required from, guardians, and 
the cases in which such allowances should be granted; 
(c) as to the procedure to be followed with respect to applications of guardians for permission 
to do acts referred to in sections 28 and 29 ; 
(d) as to the circumstances in which such requisitions as arc mentioned in clauses (a), (b), (c) 
and (d) of section 34 should be made ; 
(e) as to the preservation of statements and accounts delivered and exhibited by guardians ; 
(ff) as to the inspection of those statements and accounts by persons interested ; 
2[(ff) as to the audit of accounts under section 34A, the class of persons who should be 
appointed to audit accounts, and the scales of remuneration to be granted to them;] 
(g) as to the custody of money, and securities for money, belonging to wards ; 
(h) as to the securities on which money belonging to wards may be invested ; 
(i) as to the education of wards for whom guardians, not being Collectors, have been appointed 
or declared by the Court ; and, 
(j) generally, for the guidance of the Courts in carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Rules under clauses (a) and (1) of sub-section (1) shall not have effect until they have been 
approved by the State Government, nor shall any rule under this section have effect until it has been 
published in the Official Gazette. 
                                                      
1. See now s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908). 
2. Ins. by Act 17 of 1929, s. 3. 

17 
 
51. Applicability of Act to guardians already appointed by Court.—A guardian appointed by, 
or holding a certificate of administration from, a Civil Court under any enactment repealed by this Act 
shall, save as may be prescribed, be subject to the provisions of this Act, and of the rules made under 
it, as if he had been appointed or declared by the Court under Chapter II. 
52. [Amendment of Indian Majority Act.] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the 
Schedule. 
53. [Amendment of Chapter XXXI of the Code of Civil Procedure.] Rep. by the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), s. 156 and the Fifth Schedule. 
THE SCHEDULE.—[Enactments repealed.] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and 
the Schedule. 
 
______ 


================================================================================
  📄 Hindu Marriage Act.pdf
     Pages: 14
================================================================================
1 
 
THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955 
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
_________ 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title and extent. 
2. Application of Act. 
3. Definitions. 
4. Overriding effect of Act. 
HINDU MARRIAGES 
5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage. 
6. [Omitted.]. 
7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage. 
8. Registration of Hindu marriages. 
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION 
9. Restitution of conjugal right. 
10. Judicial separation. 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 
11. Void marriages. 
12. Voidable marriages. 
13. Divorce. 
13A. Alternate relief in divorce proceedings. 
13B. Divorce by mutual consent. 
14. No petition for divorce to be presented within one year of marriage. 
15. Divorced persons when may marry again. 
16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages. 
17. Punishment of bigamy. 
18. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for a Hindu marriage. 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE 
19. Court to which petition shall be presented. 
20. Contents and verification of petitions. 
21. Application of Act 5 of 1908. 
21A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases. 
21B. Special provision relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act. 
21C. Documentary evidence. 
22. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published. 
23. Decree in proceedings. 
23A. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings. 
24. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings. 
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance. 
26. Custody of children. 
27. Disposal of property. 
28. Appeals from decrees and orders. 
 28A. Enforcement of decrees and orders. 

2 
 
SAVINGS AND REPEALS 
SECTIONS 
29. Savings. 
30. [Repealed.]. 
 
 

3 
 
THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955 
ACT NO. 25 OF 19551 
[18th May, 1955.] 
An act to amend and codify the law relating to marriage among Hindus. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and extent.—(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***, and applies also to Hindus domiciled in the territories to 
which this Act extends who are outside the said territories. 
2. Application of Act.—(1) This Act applies— 
(a) to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj, 
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and 
(c) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or  Jew by religion, unless it is proved that any such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by  any custom or usage as part of that law in respect of any of the 
matters dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed. 
Explanation.—The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be:— 
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion; 
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and  who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged; and  
(c) any person who is a convert or re-convert to the Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of any Scheduled tribe within the meaning of clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution 
unless the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise directs. 
(3) The expression “Hindu” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions contained in this section. 
3. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) the expressions “custom” and “usage” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed  for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or family: 
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and  
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not been discontinued 
by the family; 
(b) “district court” means, in any area for which there is a city civil court, that court, and in any 
other area the principal civil court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court which 
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1-7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I and to 
Pondicherry (w.e.f 1-10-1963) with modifications by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule I. 
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31-10-2019). 

4 
 
may be specified by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, as having 
jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act; 
(c) “full blood” and “half blood”—two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood 
when they are descended  from a common ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when they are 
descended from a common ancestor but by different wives; 
(d) “uterine blood”—two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they 
are descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands;  
Explanation.—In clauses (c) and (d), “ancestor” includes the father and “ancestress” the mother; 
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(f) (i) “sapinda relationship” with reference to any person extends as far as the third generation 
(inclusive) in the line  of ascent through the mother, and the fifth (inclusive) in the line of ascent 
through the father, the line being  traced upwards in each case from the person concerned, who is to 
be counted as the first generation;  
(ii) two persons are said to be “sapindas” of each other if one is a lineal ascendant of the 
other within the limits of  sapinda relationship, or if they have a common lineal ascendant who is 
within the limits of sapinda relationship  with reference to each of them; 
(g) “degrees of prohibited relationship”-two persons are said to be within the “degrees of 
prohibited relationship”— 
(i) if one is a lineal ascendant of the other; or 
(ii) if one was the wife or husband of a lineal ascendant or descendant of the other; or 
(iii) if one was the wife of the brother or of the father’s or mother’s brother or of the 
grandfather’s or grandmother’s brother of the other; or  
(iv) if the two are brother and sister, uncle and niece, aunt and nephew, or children of brother 
and sister or of two brothers or of two sisters; 
Explanation.—For the purposes of clauses (f) and (g), relationship includes— 
(i) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood;  
(ii) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;  
(iii) relationship by adoption as well as by blood; 
and all terms of relationship in those clauses shall be construed accordingly. 
4. Overriding effect of Act.—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,— 
(a) any text rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which provision is made in this Act; 
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have 
effect in so far as it is  inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act. 
HINDU MARRIAGES 
5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage.—A marriage may be solemnized between any two Hindus, if 
the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:— 
(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage; 
1[(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party— 
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 2, for clause (ii) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

5 
 
(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such 
a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or 
(c) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity 1***;] 
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of 2 [twenty-one years] and the bride, the age 
of 3[eighteen years] at the time of the marriage; 
(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custom or usage 
governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two; 
(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them 
permits of a marriage between the two; 
4*                               *                             *                            *                         *                                * 
6. [Guardianship in marriage.]—Omitted by the Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978,  
(2 of 1978), s. 6 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1-10-1978). 
7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage.—(1) A Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance 
with the customary rites and ceremonies of either party thereto. 
(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi (that is, the taking of seven steps by the 
bridegroom and the bride jointly before the sacred fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding 
when the seventh step is taken. 
8. Registration of Hindu marriages.—(1) For the purpose of facilitating the proof of Hindu 
marriages, the State Government may make rules providing that the parties to any such marriage may 
have the particulars relating to their marriage entered in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed in a Hindu Marriage Register kept for the purpose. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State Government may, if it is of 
opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, provide that the entering of the particulars referred to in 
sub-section (1) shall be compulsory in the State or in any part thereof, whether in all cases or in such 
cases as may be specified, and where any such direction has been issued, any person contravening any 
rule made in this behalf shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty-five rupees. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid before the State Legislature, as soon as may be, 
after they are made. 
(4) The Hindu Marriage Register shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection, and shall be 
admissible as evidence of the statements therein contained and certified extracts therefrom shall, on 
application, be given by the Registrar on payment to him of the prescribed fee. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the validity of any Hindu marriage shall in no 
way be affected by the omission to make the entry.  
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION 
9. Restitution of conjugal right.—5** * When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable 
excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the district 
court, for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made 
in such petition and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly. 
6[Explanation.—Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal 
from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn from 
the society.] 
7*                              *                         *                           *                             *                               * 
                                                           
1. The words “or epilepsy” omitted by Act 39 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29-12-1999). 
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule for “elighteen years” (w.e.f. 1-10-1978). 
3. Subs. by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid., for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 1-10-1978). 
4. Clause (vi) omitted by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-10-1978). 
5. The brackets and figure “(1)” omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
6. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
7. Sub-section (2) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

6 
 
10. Judicial separation.—1[(1) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnised before or after the 
commencement of this Act, may present a petition praying for a decree for judicial separation on any of 
the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of section 13, and in the case of a wife also on any of the grounds 
specified in sub-section (2) thereof, as grounds on which a petition for divorce might have been 
presented.] 
(2) Where a decree for judicial separation has been passed, it shall no longer be obligatory for the 
petitioner to cohabit with the respondent, but the court may, on the application by petition of either party 
and on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, rescind the decree if it 
considers it just and reasonable to do so. 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE 
11. Void marriages.—Any marriage solemnised after the commencement of this Act shall be null 
and void and may, on a petition presented by either party thereto 2[against the other party], be so declared 
by a decree of nullity if it contravenes any one of the conditions specified in clauses (i), (iv) and (v) of 
section 5. 
12. Voidable marriages.—(1) Any marriage solemnised, whether before or after the commencement 
of this Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, 
namely:— 
3[(a) that the marriage has not been consummated owing to the impotence of the respondent; or] 
(b) that the marriage is in contravention of the condition specified in clause (ii) of section 5; or 
(c) that the consent of the petitioner, or where the consent of the guardian in marriage of the 
petitioner 4[was required under section 5 as it stood immediately before the commencement of the 
Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978 (2 of 1978)], the consent of such guardian was 
obtained by force 5[or by fraud as to the nature of the ceremony or as to any material fact or 
circumstances concerning the respondent]; or 
(d) that the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the 
petitioner. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no petition for annulling a marriage— 
(a) on the ground specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be entertained if— 
(i) the petition is presented more than one year after the force had ceased to operate or, as the 
case may be, the fraud had been discovered; or 
(ii) the petitioner has, with his or her full consent, lived with the other party to the marriage as 
husband or wife after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been 
discovered; 
(b) on the ground specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be entertained unless the court is 
satisfied— 
(i) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged; 
(ii) that proceedings have been instituted in the case of a marriage solemnised before the 
commencement of this Act within one year of such commencement and in the case of marriages 
solemnised after such commencement within one year from the date of the marriage; and 
(iii) that marital intercourse with the consent of the petitioner has not taken place since the 
discovery by the petitioner of the existence of 6[the said ground]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 4, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause (a) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule, for “is required under section 5” (w.e.f. 1-10-1978). 
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 6, for “or fraud” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the grounds for a decree” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

7 
 
13. Divorce.—(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, 
may, on a petition presented by either the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the 
ground that the other party— 
1[(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any 
person other than his or her spouse; or 
(ia) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, treated the petitioner with cruelty; or 
(ib) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition; or] 
(ii) has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion; or 
2[(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently 
from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be 
expected to live with the respondent. 
Explanation.—In this clause,— 
(a) the expression “mental disorder” means mental illness, arrested or incomplete 
development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of mind and 
includes schizophrenia; 
(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder” means a persistent disorder or disability of mind 
(whether or not including sub—normality of intelligence) which results in abnormally aggressive 
or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the other party, and whether or not it requires or 
is susceptible to medical treatment; or] 
3* 
 
 
 
* 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(v) has 4* * * been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form; or 
(vi) has renounced the world by entering any religious order; or 
(vii) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons 
who would naturally have heard of it, had that party been alive; 5*** 
6*                                  *                            *                      *                         *                           * 
7 [Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “desertion” means the desertion of the 
petitioner by the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and without the consent or 
against the wish of such party, and includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the 
marriage, and its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.]  
8[(1A) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after the commencement of this Act, 
may also present a petition for the dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground— 
(i) that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of 9[one year] or upwards after the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding 
to which they were parties; or 
(ii) that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of 9[one year] or upwards after the passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a 
proceeding to which they were parties.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for clause (i) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause (iii) (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3. Clause (iv) omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-3-2019). 
4. Certain words omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
5. The word “or” omitted by Act 44 of 1964, s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-12-1964). 
6. Clauses (viii) and (ix) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-12-1964). 
7. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
8. Ins. by Act 44 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-12-1964). 
9. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for “two years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

8 
 
(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage by a decree of divorce on 
the ground,— 
(i) in the case of any marriage solemnized before the commencement of this Act, that the husband 
had married again before such commencement or that any other wife of the husband married before 
such commencement was alive at the time of the solemnization of the marriage of the petitioner: 
Provided that in either case the other wife is alive at the time of the presentation of the petition; or 
(ii) that the husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or 
1[bestiality; or] 
2[(iii) that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956                 
(78 of 1956), or in a proceeding under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973               
(2 of 1974) (or under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898                
(5 of 1898), a decree or order, as the case may be, has been passed against the husband awarding 
maintenance to the wife notwithstanding that she was living apart and that since the passing of such 
decree or order, cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed for one year or upwards; 
(iv) that her marriage (whether consummated or not) was solemnized before she attained the age 
of fifteen years and she has repudiated the marriage after attaining that age but before attaining the 
age of eighteen years. 
Explanation.—This clause applies whether the marriage was solemnized before or after the 
commencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976).] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Uttar Pradesh 
Amendment of section 13 of Act XXV of 1955.—In sub-section (1) of section 13 of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955,-- 
(a) after clause (i) the following new cause shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have 
been inserted; 
“(i-a) has persistently or repeatedly treated the petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a 
reasonable apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that it will be harmful or injurious for the 
petitioner to live with the other party ;or”, and 
(b) for clause (vii), the following clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have 
been substituted; 
“(viii) has not resumed cohabitation after the passing of a decree for judicial separation against 
that party and— 
(a) a period of two years has elapsed since the passing of such decree, or 
(b) the case is one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner or of exceptional depravity on the part 
of the other party; or”. 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act XIII of 1962, s. 2] 
3[13A. Alternate relief in divorce proceedings.—In any proceeding under this Act, on a petition for 
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce, except in so far as the petition is founded on the grounds 
mentioned in clauses (ii), (vi) and (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 13, the court may, if it considers it just 
so to do having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass instead a decree for judicial separation. 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for “bestiality” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-2976). 
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

9 
 
13B. Divorce by mutual consent.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act a petition for dissolution 
of marriage by a decree of divorce may be presented to the district court by both the parties to a marriage 
together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or after the commencement of the Marriage Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), on the ground that they have been living separately for a period of 
one year or more, that they have not been able to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the 
marriage should be dissolved. 
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of the 
presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section (1) and not later than eighteen months after the said 
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall, on being satisfied, after hearing the 
parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized and that the 
averments in the petition are true, pass a decree of divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolved with 
effect from the date of the decree.] 
14. No petition for divorce to be presented within one year of marriage.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, it shall not be competent for any court to entertain any petition for 
dissolution of a marriage by a decree of divorce, 1[unless at the date of the presentation of the petition one 
year has elapsed] since the date of the marriage: 
Provided that the court may, upon application made to it in accordance with such rules as may be 
made by the High Court in that behalf, allow a petition to be presented 4[before one year has elapsed] 
since the date of the marriage on the ground that the case is one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner 
or of exceptional depravity on the part of the respondent, but if it appears to the court at the hearing of the 
petition that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by any misrepresentation or concealment 
of the nature of the case, the court may, if it pronounces a decree, do so subject to the condition that the 
decree shall not have effect until after the 2[expiry of one year] from the date of the marriage or may 
dismiss the petition without prejudice to any petition which may be brought after 3[expiration of the said 
one year] upon the same or substantially the same facts as those alleged in support of the petition            
so dismissed. 
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to present a petition for divorce before 
the 4[expiration of one year] from the date of the marriage, the court shall have regard to the interests of 
any children of the marriage and to the question whether there is a reasonable probability of a 
reconciliation between the parties before the expiration of the 5[said one year]. 
15. Divorced persons when may marry again.—When a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of 
divorce and either there is no right of appeal against the decree or, if there is such a right of appeal, the 
time for appealing has expired without an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has been presented 
but has been dismissed, it shall be lawful for either party to the marriage to marry again. 
6*                             *                        *                              *                                *                             * 
7[16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages.—(1) Notwithstanding that a marriage 
is null and void under section 11, any child of such marriage who would have been legitimate if the 
marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is born before or after the commencement 
of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree of nullity is 
granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to be void 
otherwise than on a petition under this Act. 
(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of a voidable marriage under section 12, any child 
begotten or conceived before the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the parties 
to the marriage if at the date of the decree it had been dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be 
deemed to be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expiry of three years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expiration of the said one year” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expiry of three years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “said three years” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
6. Proviso omitted by s.10, ibid.  (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
7. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for s. 16 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

10 
 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be construed as conferring upon any 
child of a marriage which is null and void or which is annulled by a decree of nullity under section 12, 
any rights in or to the property of any person, other than the parents, in any case where, but for the 
passing of this Act, such child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such rights by 
reason of his not being the legitimate child of his parents.] 
17. Punishment of bigamy.—Any marriage between two Hindus solemnized after the 
commencement of this Act is void if at the date of such marriage either party had a husband or wife 
living; and the provisions of sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), shall 
apply accordingly. 
18. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for a Hindu marriage.—Every 
person who procures a marriage of himself or herself to be solemnized under this Act in contravention of 
the conditions specified in clauses (iii), (iv), 1[and (v)] of section 5 shall be punishable— 
 2[(a) in the case of contravention of the condition specified in clause (iii) of section 5, with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.] 
(b) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause (iv) or clause (v) of                  
section 5, with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both; 3* * * 
4*                      *                             *                            *                              *                                   * 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE 
5[19. Court to which petition shall be presented.—Every petition under this Act shall be presented 
to the District Court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction:— 
(i) the marriage was solemnized, or 
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition, resides, or 
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together, or 
6[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, wher she is residing on the date of presentation of the 
petition; or] 
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the 
respondent is at that time, residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been 
heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons who would naturally have 
heard of him if he were alive.] 
20. Contents and verification of petitions.—(1) Every petition presented under this Act shall state 
as distinctly as the nature of the case permits the facts on which the claim to relief is founded 7[and, 
except in a petition under section 11, shall also state] that there is no collusion between the petitioner and 
the other party to the marriage. 
(2) The statements contained in every petition under this Act shall be verified by the petitioner or 
some other competent person in the manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and may, at the 
hearing, be referred to as evidence. 
21. Application of Act 5 of 1908.—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to such 
rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as far 
as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule, for “(v) and (vi)” (w.e.f. 1-10-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2007, s. 20 (w.e.f. 30-10-2007). 
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1-10-1978). 
4. Clause (c) omitted by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-10-1978). 
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 12, for s. 19 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
6. Ins. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23-12-2003). 
7. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 13, for “and shall also State” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

11 
 
1[21A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases.—(1) Where— 
(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to a district court having jurisdiction by a party to 
a marriage praying for a decree for judicial separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce 
under section 13, and 
(b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter by the other party to the marriage 
praying for a decree for judicial separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce under section 
13 on any ground, whether in the same district court or in a different district court, in the same State 
or in a different State,  
the petitions shall be dealt with as specified in sub-section (2). 
(2) In a case where sub-section (1) applies,— 
(a) if the petitions are presented to the same district court, both the petitions shall be tried and 
heard together by that district court; 
(b) if the petitions are presented to different district courts, the petition presented later shall be 
transferred to the district court in which the earlier petition was presented and both the petitions shall 
be heard and disposed of together by the district court in which the earlier petition was presented. 
(3) In a case where clause (b) of sub-section (2) applies, the court or the Government, as the case may 
be, competent under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), to transfer any suit or proceeding 
from the district court in which the later petition has been presented to the district court in which the 
earlier petition is pending, shall exercise its powers to transfer such later petition as if it had been 
empowered so to do under the said Code. 
21B. Special provision relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act.—(1) The trial of a 
petition under this Act shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of justice in respect of 
the trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusion unless the court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded. 
(2) Every petition under this Act shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the 
respondent. 
(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the hearing within three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on the 
respondent. 
21C. Documentary evidence.—Notwithstanding anything in any enactment to the contrary, no 
document shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceeding at the trial of a petition under this Act on 
the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered.] 
2[22. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published.—(1) Every proceeding 
under this Act shall be conducted in camera and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish 
any matter in relation to any such proceeding except a judgment of the High Court or of the Supreme 
Court printed or published with the previous permission of the court. 
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of the provisions contained in           
sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.] 
23. Decree in proceedings.—(1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether defended or not, if the 
court is satisfied that 
(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the petitioner 3[except in cases where the 
relief is sought by him on the ground specified in sub-clause (a), sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of 
clause (ii) of section 5] is not in any way taking advantage of his or her own wrong or disability for 
the purpose of such relief, and 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 14, (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for s. 22 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

12 
 
(b) where the ground of the petition is the ground specified 1* * * in clause (i) of sub-section (1) 
of section 13, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or connived at or condoned the 
act or acts complained of, or where the ground of the petition is cruelty the petitioner has not in any 
manner condoned the cruelty, and 
2[(bb) when a divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such consent has not been 
obtained by force, fraud or undue influence, and] 
(c) 2[the petition (not being a petition presented under section 11)] is not presented or prosecuted 
in collusion with the respondent, and 
(d) there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in instituting the proceeding, and 
(e) there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted, then, and in such a case, but 
not otherwise, the court shall decree such relief accordingly. 
(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under this Act, it shall be the duty of the court in the first 
instance, in every case where it is possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the 
case, to make every endeavour to bring about reconciliation between the parties: 
3[Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any proceeding wherein relief is 
sought on any of the grounds specified in clause (ii), clause (iii), clause (iv), clause (v), clause (vi) or 
clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 13.] 
2[(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such reconciliation, the court may, if the 
parties so desire or if the court thinks it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable 
period not exceeding fifteen days and refer the matter to any person named by the parties in this behalf or 
to any person nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with directions to report to the 
court as to whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the court shall in disposing of the 
proceeding have due regard to the report. 
(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce, the court passing the decree 
shall give a copy thereof free of cost to each of the parties.] 
4[23A. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings.—In any proceeding for divorce or 
judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights, the respondent may not only oppose the relief sought 
on the ground of petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, but also make a counter-claim for any relief 
under this Act on that ground; and if the petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion is proved, the court 
may give to the respondent any relief under this Act to which he or she would have been entitled if he or 
she had presented a petition seeking such relief on that ground.] 
24. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings.—Where in any proceeding under this 
Act it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has no independent 
income sufficient for her or his support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the 
application of the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the 
proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner’s own 
income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court to be reasonable. 
5[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and such monthly 
sum during the proceeding, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of 
service of notice on the wife or the husband, as the case may be.] 
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.—(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act 
may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the 
purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall 6* * * pay to 
                                                           
1. The words, bracket, letter of figure “in clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 10 or” omitted by Act 68 of 1976,  s. 16, 
(w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “ the petition” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3. Added by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
4.  Ins by s. 17, ibid.  (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
5. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 8 (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
6.  The words “while the applicant remains unmarried” omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 

13 
 
the applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum 
for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent’s own income and 
other property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant 1[the conduct of the parties and other 
circumstances of the case], it may seem to the court to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if 
necessary, by a charge on the immovable property of the respondent. 
(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any time after 
it has made an order under sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind 
any such order in such manner as the court may deem just. 
(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been made under this section 
has re-married or, if such party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the 
husband, that he has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, 2[it may at the instance of 
the other party vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may deem just]. 
26. Custody of children.—In any proceeding under this Act, the court may, from time to time, pass 
such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper with respect to 
the custody, maintenance and education of minor children, consistently with their wishes, wherever 
possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by petition for the purpose, make from time to time, 
all such orders and provisions with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of such children as 
might have been made by such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree 
were still pending, and the court may also from time to time revoke, suspend or vary any such orders and 
provisions previously made: 
3[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor children, 
pending the proceeding for obtaining such decree, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty 
days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.] 
27. Disposal of property.—In any proceeding under this Act, the court may make such provisions in 
the decree as it deems just and proper with respect to any property presented, at or about the time of 
marriage, which may belong jointly to both the husband and the wife. 
4[28. Appeals from decrees and orders.—(1) All decrees made by the court in any proceeding under 
this Act shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be appealable as decrees of the court made in 
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and every such appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals 
ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction. 
(2) Orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act under section 25 or section 26 shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be appealable if they are not interim orders, and every such 
appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in 
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction. 
(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject of costs only. 
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a 5[period of ninety days] from the date 
of the decree or order. 
28A. Enforcement of decrees and orders.—All decrees and orders made by the court in any 
proceeding under this Act shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders of the court made 
in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being in forced.] 
SAVINGS AND REPEALS 
29. Savings.—(1) A marriage solemnized between Hindus before the commencement of this Act, 
which is otherwise valid, shall not be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid by reason only of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 18, for certain words. (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “it shall rescind the order” (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 9 (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
5. Subs. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 5, for “period of thirty days” (w.e.f. 23-12-2003). 

14 
 
the fact that the parties thereto belonged to the same gotra or pravara or belonged to different religions, 
castes or sub-divisions of the same caste. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any right recognised by custom or 
conferred by any special enactment to obtain the dissolution of a Hindu marriage, whether solemnized 
before or after the commencement of this Act. 
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any proceeding under any law for the time being in 
force for declaring any marriage to be null and void or for annulling or dissolving any marriage or for 
judicial separation pending at the commencement of this Act, and any such proceeding may be continued 
and determined as if this Act had not been passed. 
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions contained in the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954, (43 of 1954) with respect to marriages between Hindus solemnized under that Act, 
whether before or after the commencement of this Act. 
30. [Repeals].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 26-12-1960). 


================================================================================
  📄 Hindu Succession Act.pdf
     Pages: 15
================================================================================
1 
 
THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956 
____________ 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title and extent. 
2. Application of Act. 
3. Definitions and interpretation. 
4. Overriding effect of Act. 
 
CHAPTER II 
INTESTATE SUCCESSION 
General 
5. Act not to apply to certain properties. 
6. Devolution of interest in coparcenary property. 
7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwad, tavazhi, kutumba, kavaruorillom. 
8. General rules of succession in the case of males. 
9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule. 
10. Distribution of property among heirs in class I of the Schedule. 
11. Distribution of property among heirs in class II of the Schedule. 
12. Order of succession among agnates and congnates. 
13. Computation of degrees. 
14. Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property. 
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus. 
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution among heirs of a female Hindu. 
17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumakkattayam and aliyasantana laws. 
 
General provisions relating to succession 
18. Full blood preferred to half blood. 
19. Mode of succession of two or more heirs. 
20. Right of child in womb. 
21. Presumption in cases of simultaneous deaths. 
22. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases. 
23. [Omitted.]. 
24. [Omitted.]. 
25. Murderer disqualified. 
26. Convert’s descendants disqualified. 
27. Succession when heir disqualified. 
28. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify. 
Escheat 
29. Failure of heirs. 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER III 
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION 
SECTIONS 
30. Testamentary succession. 
CHAPTER IV 
REPEALS 
31. [Repealed.]. 
THE SCHEDULE. 
 
 
 

3 
 
THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956 
ACT NO. 30 OF 19561 
[17th June, 1956.]  
An Act to amend and codify the law relating to intestate succession among Hindus. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:― 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and extent.―(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***. 
2. Application of Act.―(1)This Act applies― 
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj, 
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion, unless it is 
proved that any such person would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or 
usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this Act had not been 
passed. 
Explanation.―The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be:― 
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion; 
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged; 
(c) any person who is a convert or reconvert to the Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause (25) of article 366 of the 
Constitution unless the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise directs. 
(3) The expression “Hindu” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions contained in this section. 
3. Definitions and interpretation.―(1)In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,― 
(a) “agnate”―one person is said to be an “agnate” of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoption wholly through males; 
(b) “aliyasantana law” means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not 
been passed, would have been governed by the Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949, (Madras Act 9 of 
1949) or by the customary aliyasantana law with respect to the matters for which provision is made in 
this Act; 
                                                           
1. The Act hasbeen extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 
and First Schedule. 
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31-10- 2019). 
 

4 
 
(c) “cognate”―one person is said to be a “cognate” of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoption but not wholly through males; 
(d) the expressions “custom” and “usage” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or family: 
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy: and 
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not been discontinued 
by the family; 
(e) full blood “half blood” and “uterine blood”― 
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are descended 
from a common ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they are descended from a 
common ancestor but by different wives; 
(ii)two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are descended 
from a common ancestress but by different husbands; 
Explanation.―In this clause “ancestor” includes the father and “ancestress” the mother; 
(f) “heir” means any person, male or female, who is entitled to succeed to the property of an 
intestate under this Act; 
(g) “intestate”―a person is deemed to die intestate in respect of property of which he or she has 
not made a testamentary disposition capable of taking effect; 
(h) “marumakkattayam law” means the system of law applicable to persons― 
(a)who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed by the Madras 
Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act 22 of 1933); the Travancore Nayar Act (2 of 1100K); 
the Travancore Ezhava Act (3 of 1100K); the Travancore Nanjinad Vellala Act (6 of 1101K); the 
Travancore Kshatriya Act (7 of 1108K); the Travancore Krishnanvaka Marumak kathayee (Act 7 
of 1115K); the Cochin Marumak kathayam Act (33 of 1113K); or the Cochin Nayar Act (29 of 
1113K); with respect to the matters for which provision is made in this Act; or 
(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are largely domiciled in the State of 
Travancore Cochin or Madras 1[as it existed immediately before the 1st November, 1956], and 
who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed with respect to the matters for 
which provision is made in this Act by any system of inheritance in which descent is traced 
through the female line; 
but does not include the aliyasantana law; 
(i) “nambudri law” means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not been 
passed, would have been governed by the Madras Nambudri Act, 1932 Madras Act (21 of 1933); the 
Cochin Nambudri Act (17 of 111K); or the Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act (3 of 1106K); with 
respect to the matters for which provision is made in this Act; 
(j) “related” means related by legitimate kinship: 
Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be related to their mother and to one 
another, and their legitimate descendants shall be deemed to be related to them and to one another; 
and any word expressing relationship or denoting a relative shall be construed accordingly. 
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, words importing the masculine gender shall not 
be taken to include females. 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956. 

5 
 
4. Overriding effect of Act.―(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,― 
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which provision is made in this Act; 
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to apply 
to Hindus in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act. 
1*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
CHAPTER II 
INTESTATE SUCCESSION  
General 
5. Act not to apply to certain properties.―This Act shall not apply to― 
(i) any property succession to which is regulated by the Indian Succession Act, 1925 ( 39 of 
1925), by reason of the provisions contained in section 21 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 
1954); 
(ii) any estate which descends to a single heir by the terms of any covenant or agreement entered 
into by the Ruler of any Indian State with the Government of India or by the terms of any enactment 
passed before the commencement of this Act; 
(iii) the Valiamma Thampuran Kovilagam Estate and the Palace Fund administered by the Palace 
Administration Board by reason of the powers conferred by Proclamation (IX of 1124) dated 29th 
June, 1949, promulgated by the Maharaja of Cochin. 
2[6. Devolution of interest in coparcenary property.―(1) On and from the commencement of the 
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (39 of 2005), in a Joint Hindu family governed by the 
Mitakshara law, the daughter of a coparcener shall,― 
(a) by birth become a coparcener in her own right the same manner as the son; 
(b) have the same rights in the coparcenery property as she would have had if she had been a son; 
(c) be subject to the same liabilities in respect of the said coparcenery property as that of a son, 
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to include a reference to a daughter 
of a coparcener: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect or invalidate any disposition or 
alienation including any partition or testamentary disposition of property which had taken place before the 
20th day of December, 2004. 
(2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of sub-section (1) shall be held 
by her with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, as property capable of being disposed of 
by her by testamentary disposition. 
(3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 
(39 of 2005), his interest in the property of a Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, shall 
devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by 
survivorship, and the coparcenery property shall be deemed to have been divided as if a partition had 
taken place and,― 
(a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son; 
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 39 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-9-2005). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for section 6 (w.e.f. 9-9-2005). 

6 
 
(b) the share of the pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter, as they would have got had they 
been alive at the time of partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child of such pre-deceased son or 
of such pre-deceased daughter; and 
(c) the share of the pre-deceased child of a pre-deceased son or of a pre-deceased daughter, as 
such child would have got had he or she been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the 
child of such pre-deceased child of the pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter, as the case may 
be. 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest of a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener 
shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to him if a partition of the 
property had taken place immediately before his death, irrespective of whether he was entitled to claim 
partition or not. 
(4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (39 of 2005), no court 
shall recognise any right to proceed against a son, grandson or great-grandson for the recovery of any debt 
due from his father, grandfather or great-grandfather solely on the ground of the pious obligation under 
the Hindu law, of such son, grandson or great-grandson to discharge any such debt: 
Provided that in the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2005 (39 of 2005), nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect― 
(a) the right of any creditor to proceed against the son, grandson or great-grandson, as the case 
may be; or 
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of, any such debt, and any such right or 
alienation shall be enforceable under the rule of pious obligation in the same manner and to the same 
extent as it would have been enforceable as if the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 
(39 of 2005)had not been enacted. 
Explanation.―For the purposes of clause (a), the expression “son”, “grandson” or “great-grandson” 
shall be deemed to refer to the son, grandson or great-grandson, as the case may be, who was born or 
adopted prior to the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 (39 of 2005). 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has been effected before the 
20th day of December, 2004 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this section “partition” means any partition made by execution of 
a deed of partition duly registered under the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) or partition effected by a 
decree of a court.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Karnataka.― 
Insertion of new sections in Central Act 30 of 1956.―In the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Central 
Act 30 of 1956) after section 6, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:― 
“6A. Equal rights to daughter in co-parcenary property.―Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 6 of this Act,― 
(a) in a joint Hindu family governed by Mitakshara law, the daughter of a co-parcener shall by 
birth become a co-parcener in her own right in the same manner as the son and have the same rights 
in the co-parcenary property as she would have had if she had been a son inclusive of the right to 
claim by survivorship and shall be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in respect thereto as 
the son; 
(b) at a partition in such Joint Hindu Family the co-parcenary property shall be so divided as to 
allot to a daughter the same share as is allotable to a son: 
Provided that the share which a predeceased son or a predeceased daughter would have got at the 
partition if he or she had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child 
of such predeceased son or of such predeceased daughter: 

7 
 
Provided further that the share allotable to the predeceased child of the predeceased son or of a 
predeceased daughter, if such child had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the 
child of such predeceased child of the predeceased son or of such predeceased daughter, as the case 
may be; 
(c) any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of the provisions of clause 
(a) shall be held by her with the incidents of co-parcenary ownership and shall be regarded, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, as 
property capable of being disposed of by her by will or other testamentary disposition; 
(d) nothing in clause (b) shall apply to a daughter married prior to or to a partition which had 
been effected before the commencement of Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1990. 
6B. Interest to devolve by survivorship on death.―When a female Hindu dies after the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1990, having at the time of her 
death an interest in a Mitakshara co-parcenary property, her interest in the property shall devolve by 
survivorship upon the surviving members of the co-parcenary and not in accordance with this Act: 
Provided that if the deceased had left any child or child of a pre-deceased child, the interest of the 
deceased in the Mitakshara co-parcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, 
as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship. 
Explanation.―(1) For the purposes of this section the interest of female Hindu Mitakshara co-
parcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to her if a partition 
of the property had taken place immediately before her death, irrespective of whether she was entitled to 
claim partition or not. 
(2) Nothing contained in the proviso to this section shall be construed as enabling a person who, 
before the death of the deceased had separated himself or herself from the co-parcenary, or any of his or 
her heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to therein. 
6C. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases.―(1) Where, after the commencement 
of Hindu Succession (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1990 an interest in any immovable property of an 
intestate or in any business carried on by him or her, whether solely or in conjunction with others 
devolves under sections 6A or 6B upon two or more heirs and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer 
his or her interest in the property or business, the other heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the 
interest proposed to be transferred. 
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred under 
sub-section (1) shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court, on 
application, being made to it in this behalf, and if any person proposing to acquire the interest is not 
willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all costs of or 
incidental to the application. 
(3) If there are two or more heirs proposing to acquire any interest under, this section, that heir who 
offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred. 
Explanation.―In this section 'Court' means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immoveable property is situate or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette specify in this behalf.] 
[Vide Karnataka Act 23 of 1994, sec. 2]. 
7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwad, tavazhi, kutumba, kavaru or 
illom.―(1)When a Hindu to whom the marumakkattayam or nambudri law would have applied if this 
Act had not been passed dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death 
an interest in the property of a tarwad, tavazhi or illom, as the case may be, his or her interest in the 
property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not 
according to the marumakkattayam or nambudri law. 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
tarwad, tavazhi or illom shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the tarwad, tavazhi or illom, as 

8 
 
the case may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita had been 
made immediately before his or her death among all the members of the tarwad, tavazhior illom, as the 
case may be, then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the 
marumakkattayam or nambudri law applicable to him or her, and such share shall be deemed to have been 
allotted to him or her absolutely. 
(2) When a Hindu to whom the aliyasantana law would have applied if this Act had not been passed 
dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death an undivided interest in 
the property of a kutumba or kavaru, as the case may be, his or her interest in the property shall devolve 
by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not according to the 
aliyasantana law. 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
kutumba or kavaru shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the kutumba or kavaru, as the case 
may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita had been made 
immediately before his or her death among all the members of the kutumba or kavaru, as the case may be, 
then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the aliyasantana law, and 
such share shall be deemed to have been allotted to him or her absolutely. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when a sthanamdar dies after the 
commencement of this Act, the sthanam property held by him shall devolve upon the members of the 
family to which the sthanamdar belonged and the heirs of the sthanamdar as if the sthanam property had 
been divided per capita immediately before the death of the sthanamdar among himself and all the 
members of his family then living,, and the shares falling to the members of his family and the heirs of the 
sthanamdar shall be held by them as their separate property. 
Explanation.―For the purposes of this sub-section, the family of a sthanamdar shall include every 
branch of that family, whether divided or undivided, the male members of which would have been 
entitled by any custom or usage to succeed to the position of sthanamdar if this Act had not been passed. 
8. General rules of succession in the case of males.―The property of a male Hindu dying intestate 
shall devolve according to the provisions of this Chapter:― 
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in class I of the Schedule; 
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in class 
II of the Schedule; 
(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon the agnates of the deceased; and 
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of the deceased. 
9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule.―Among the heirs specified in the Schedule, 
those in class I shall take simultaneously and to the exclusion of all other heirs; those in the first entry in 
class II shall be preferred to those in the second entry; those in the second entry shall be preferred to those 
in the third entry; and so on in succession. 
10. Distribution of property among heirs in class I of the Schedule.―The property of an intestate 
shall be divided among the heirs in class I of the Schedule in accordance with the following rules:― 
Rule 1.―The intestate’s widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the widows together, 
shall take one share. 
Rule 2.―The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate shall each take one 
share. 
Rule 3.―The heirs in the branch of each pre-deceased son or each pre-deceased daughter of the 
intestate shall take between them one share. 
Rule 4.―The distribution of the share referred to in Rule 3— 

9 
 
(i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased son shall be so made that his widow (or 
widows together) and the surviving sons and daughters get equal portions; and the branch of his 
pre-deceased sons gets the same portion; 
(ii) among the heirs in the branch of the pre-deceased daughter shall be so made that the 
surviving sons and daughters get equal portions. 
11. Distribution of property among heirs in class II of the Schedule.―The property of an intestate 
shall be divided between the heirs specified in any one entry in class II of the Schedule so that they, share 
equally. 
12. Order of succession among agnates and cognates.―The order of succession among agnates or 
cognates, as the case may be, shall be determined in accordance with the rules of preference laid down 
hereunder:― 
Rule 1.―Of two heirs, the one who has fewer or no degrees of ascent is preferred. 
Rule 2.―Where the number of degrees of ascent is the same or none, that heir is preferred who 
has fewer or no degrees of descent. 
Rule 3.―Where neither heir is entitled to be preferred to the other under Rule 1 or Rule 2 they 
take simultaneously. 
13. Computation of degrees.―(1) For the purposes of determining the order of succession among 
agnates or cognates, relationship shall be reckoned from the intestate to the heir in terms of degrees of 
ascent or degrees of descent or both, as the case may be. 
(2) Degrees of ascent and degrees of descent shall be computed inclusive of the intestate. 
(3) Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending. 
14.Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property.―(1)Any property possessed by a 
female Hindu, whether acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full 
owner thereof and not as a limited owner. 
Explanation.―In this sub-section, “property” includes both movable and immovable property 
acquired by a female Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears 
of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or 
by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription, or in any other manner whatsoever, and 
also any such property held by her as stridhana immediately before the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any property acquired by way of gift or under 
a will or any other instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under an award where the 
terms of the gift, will or other instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe a restricted estate in such 
property.  
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus.―(1) The property of a female Hindu 
dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules set out in section 16,― 
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre-deceased son or 
daughter) and the husband; 
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband; 
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father; 
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and 
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),― 
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall devolve, in the 
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased(including the children of any pre-deceased son or 
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon 
the heirs of the father; and 
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from her father-in-law shall 
devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any  
pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1) in the order 
specified therein, but upon the heirs of the husband. 

10 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Kerala.— 
Amendment of section 15.―In the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Central Act 30 of 1956), in section 
15, after clause (b) of sub-section (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:― 
“(c)” any property inherited by a female Hindu from her pre-deceased son shall devolve, not upon the 
other heirs referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the pre-
deceased son from whom she inherited the property.” 
[Vide Kerala Act 17 of 2016, sec. 2]. 
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution among heirs of a female Hindu.―The order 
of succession among the heirs referred to in section 15 shall be, and the distribution of the intestate’s 
property among those heirs shall take place according to the following rules, namely:― 
Rule 1.―Among the heirs specified in sub-section (1) of section 15, those in one entry shall be 
preferred to those in any succeeding entry, and those included in the same entry shall take simultaneously. 
Rule 2.―If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre-deceased the intestate leaving his or her own 
children alive at the time of the intestate’s death, the children of such son or daughter shall take between 
them the share which such son or daughter would have taken if living at the intestate’s death. 
Rule 3.―The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs referred to in clauses (b), (d) and 
(e) of sub-section (1) and in sub-section (2) of section 15 shall be in the same order and according to the 
same rules as would have applied if the property had been the father’s or the mother’s or the husband’s as 
the case may be, and such person had died intestate in respect thereof immediately after the intestate’s 
death. 
17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumakkattayam and atiyasantana 
laws.―The provisions of sections 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect in relation to persons who would 
have been governed by the marumakkattayam law or aliyasantana law if this Act had not been passed as 
if― 
(i) for sub-clauses (c) and (d) of section 8, the following had been substituted, namely:― 
“(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon his relatives, whether 
agnates or cognates.”; 
(ii) for clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of section 15, the following had been substituted, 
namely:― 
“(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre-deceased son or 
daughter) and the mother; 
(b) secondly, upon the father and the husband; 
(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mother; 
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and 
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husband.”; 
(iii) clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 15 had been omitted; 
(iv) section 23 had been omitted. 
General provisions relating to succession 
18. Full blood preferred to half blood.―Heirs related to an intestate by full blood shall be preferred 
to heirs related by half blood, if the nature of the relationship is the same in every other respect. 
19. Mode of succession of two or more heirs.―If two or more heirs succeed together to the property 
of an intestate, they shall take the property,― 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, per capita and not per stirpes; and 
(b) as tenants-in-common and not as joint tenants. 
20. Right of child in womb.―A child who was in the womb at the time of the death of an intestate 
and who is subsequently born alive shall have the same right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she had 
been born before the death of the intestate, and the inheritance shall be deemed to vest in such a case with 
effect from the date of the death of the intestate. 
21. Presumption in cases of simultaneous deaths.―Where two persons have died in circumstances 
rendering it uncertain whether either of them, and if so which, survived the other, then, for all purposes 

11 
 
affecting succession to property, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger 
survived the elder. 
22. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases.―(1) Where, after the commencement 
of this Act, an interest in any immovable property of an intestate, or in any business carried on by him or 
her, whether solely or in conjunction with others, devolves upon two or more heirs specified in class I of 
the Schedule, and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or her interest in the property or business, 
the other heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the interest proposed to be transferred. 
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred under 
this section shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court on 
application being made to it in this behalf, and if any person proposing to acquire the interest is not 
willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all costs of or 
incident to the application. 
(3) If there are two or more heirs specified in class I of the Schedule proposing to acquire any interest 
under this section, that heir who offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred. 
Explanation.―In this section, “court” means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immovable property is situate or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
23. [Special provision respecting dwelling-houses.]―Omitted by the Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Act, 2005 (39 of 2005), s. 4 (w.e.f. 9-9-2005). 
24. [Certain windows re-marrying may not inherit as windows.]―Omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-9-
2005). 
25. Murderer disqualified.―A person who commits murder or abets the commission of murder 
shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person murdered, or any other property in 
furtherance of the succession to which he or she committed or abetted the commission of the murder. 
26. Convert’s descendants disqualified.―Where, before or after the commencement of this Act, a 
Hindu has ceased or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion, children born to him or her 
after such conversion and their descendants shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of any of 
their Hindu relatives, unless such children or descendants are Hindus at the time when the succession 
opens. 
27. Succession when heir disqualified.―If any person is disqualified from inheriting any property 
under this Act, it shall devolve as if such person had died before the intestate. 
28. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify.―No person shall be disqualified from succeeding to any 
property on the ground of any disease, defect or deformity, or save as provided in this Act, on any other 
ground whatsoever. 
Escheat 
29. Failure of heirs.―If an intestate has left no heir qualified to succeed to his or her property in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, such property shall devolve on the Government; and the 
Government shall take the property subject to all the obligations and liabilities to which an heir would 
have been subject. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Tamil Nadu 
In the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal act), after chapter II, the 
following chapter shall be inserted, namely:-- 
 
 

12 
 
"CHAPTER II-A, 
Succession by survivorship. 
29-A. Equal rights to daughter in coparcenary property.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 6 of this Act,-- 
(i) in a Joint Hindu Family governed by Mitakshara Law, the daughter of a coparcener shall 
by birth become a coparcener in her own right in the same manner as a son and have the same 
rights in the coparcenary property as she would have had if she had been a son, inclusive of the 
right to claim by survivorship; and shall be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in 
respect thereto as the son; 
(ii) at a partition in such a Joint Hindu Family the coparcenary property shall be so divided as 
to allot to a daughter the same share as is allotable to a son: 
Provided that the share which a pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter would have got 
at the partition if he or she had been alive at the time of the partition shall be allotted to the 
surviving child of such pre-deceased son or of such pre-deceased daughter: 
Provided further that the share allotable to the pre-deceased child of a predeceased son or of a 
pre-deceased daughter, if such child had been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to 
the child of such pre-deceased child of the predeceased son or of the pre-deceased daughter, as 
the case may be; 
(iii) any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of the provisions of 
clause (i) shall be held by her with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, as 
property capable of being disposed of by her by will or other testamentary disposition; 
(iv) nothing in this Chapter shall apply to a daughter married before the date of the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989; 
(v) nothing in clause (ii) shall apply to a partition which had been effected before the date of 
the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989. 
29-B. Interest to devolve by survivorship on death.—When a female Hindu dies after the date 
of the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989, having, at the 
time of her death, an interest in a Mitakshara coparcenary property by virtue of the provisions of 
section 29-A, her interest in the property shall devolve by survivorship upon the surviving members 
of the coparcenary and not in accordance with this Act: 
Provided that if the deceased had left any child or child of a pre-deceased child, the interest of the 
deceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate 
succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship. 
Explanation I.--For the purposes of this section, the interest of a female Hindu Mitakshara 
coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to her if a 
partition of the property had taken place immediately before her death, irrespective of whether she 
was entitled to claim partition or not. 
Explanation II.--Nothing contained in the proviso to this section shall be construed as enabling a 
person who, before the death of the deceased, had separated himself or herself from the coparcenary 
or any of his or her heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to therein. 

13 
 
29-C. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases.--(1) Where, after the date of the 
commencement of the Hindu Succession (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1989, an interest in any 
immovable property of an intestate or in any business carried on by him or her, whether solely or in 
conjunction with others, devolves under section 29-A or section 29-B upon two or more heirs, and 
any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or her interest in the property or business, the other 
heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the interest proposed to be transferred. 
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred 
under this section shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the 
court on application being made to it in this behalf, and if any person proposing to acquire the interest 
is not willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all 
costs of, or incidental to, the application. 
(3) If there are two or more heirs proposing to acquire any interest under this section, that heir 
who offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred. 
Explanation.--In this section "court" means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immovable property is situate or the business is carried on and includes any other court which the 
State Government may, by notification in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, specify in this 
behalf.".] 
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1990, s. 2] 
CHAPTER III 
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION 
30. Testamentary succession.―1*** Any Hindu may dispose of by will or other testamentary 
disposition any property, which is capable of being so 2[disposed of by him or by her], in accordance with 
the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), or any other law for the time being in 
force and applicable to Hindus. 
Explanation.―The interest of a male Hindu in a Mitakshara coparcenary property or the interest of a 
member of a tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutumba or kavaru in the property of the tarwad, tavazhi, illom, 
kutumba or kavaru shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, be deemed to be property capable of being disposed of by him or by her within the 
meaning of this 3[section.]  
4*  
 
* 
 
 
 *  
 
 
*  
 
 
*  
CHAPTER IV 
REPEALS 
31. [Repeals.]―Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s.2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 26-12-1960). 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. The brackets and figure “(1)” omitted by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 26-12-1960). 
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2005, s. 6, for “disposed of by him” (w.e.f. 9-9-2005). 
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule for “sub-section” (w.e.f. 20-12-1974). 
2. Omitted by Act 78 of 1956, s. 29 (w.e.f. 21-12-1956). 

14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 8) 
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS II 
Class I 
Son; daughter; widow; mother; son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-deceased son; son of a 
pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased daughter; widow of a pre-deceased son; son of a  
pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; widow of 
a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son 1[son of a predeceased daughter of a pre-deceased daughter; 
daughter of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased son of a  
pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased son]. 
Class II 
I. Father. 
II. (1) Son’s daughter’s son, (2) son’s daughter’s daughter, (3) brother, (4) sister. 
III. (1) Daughter’s son’s son, (2) daughter’s son’s daughter, (3) daughter’s daughter’s son, (4) 
daughter’s daughter’s daughter. 
IV. (1) Brother’s son, (2) sister’s son, (3) brother’s daughter, (4) sister’s daughter. 
V. Father’s father; father’s mother.  
VI. Father’s widow; brother’s widow. 
VII. Father’s brother; father’s sister. 
VIII. Mother’s father; mother’s mother. 
IX. Mother’s brother; mother’s sister. 
Explanation.―In this Schedule, references to a brother or sister do not include references to a brother 
or sister by uterine blood. 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 39 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9-9-2005). 


================================================================================
  📄 Muslim Personal Law.pdf
     Pages: 4
================================================================================
1 
THE MUSLIM PERSONAL LAW (SHARIAT) APPLICATION ACT, 1937 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title and extent. 
2. Application of Personal Law to Muslims. 
3. Power to make a declaration. 
4. Rule-making power. 
5. [Repealed]. 
6. Repeals. 
 

2 
THE MUSLIM PERSONAL LAW (SHARIAT) APPLICATION ACT, 1937 
ACT NO. 26 OF 1937 
[7th October, 1937.] 
An Act to make provision for the application of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) to Muslims. 
1*** 
WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for the application of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) 
to Muslims 1***; It is hereby enacted as follows:— 
1. Short title and extent.—(1) This Act may be called the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) 
Application Act, 1937. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2 [3***]. 4*** 5 
2. Application of Personal Law to Muslims.—Notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary, 
in all questions (save questions relating to agricultural land) regarding intestate succession, special 
property of females, including personal properly inherited or obtained under contract or gift or any other 
provision of Personal Law. marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar, lian, khula and 
mubaraat, maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trusts and trust properties, and wakfs (other than 
charities and charitable institutions and charitable and religious endowments) the rule of decision in cases 
where the parties are Muslims shall be the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat). 
 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Kerala. 
Substitution of a new section for section 2, Central Act 26 of 1937.—For section 2 of the said Act, 
the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“2. Application of personal law to Muslims.—Notwithstanding any custom or usage to the 
contrary, in all questions regarding intestate succession, special property of females including personal 
property inherited or obtained under contract or gift or any other provision of personal laws, marriage, 
dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower, 
guardianship, gifts, trusts and trust properties and wakfs (other than charities and charitable institutions 
and charitable and religious endowments), the rules of decision in cases where the parties are Muslims, 
shall be the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat).” 
[Vide kerala Act 42 of 1963, s. 3.] 
                                                           
1. The words “in the Provinces of India” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. 
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 1959, s. 3 and the First Schedule for “except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 
1956, were comprised in Part B States” (w.e.f. 1-2-1960). 
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31-10- 
2019). 
4. The words “excluding the North-West Frontier Province” omitted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and 
Ordinances) Order, 1948. 
5. In its application to Pondicherry. In section 1, after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted— 
“Provided that nothing contained in this act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of                               
Pondicherry.”—(Vide Act 26 of 1968.) 
The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I and to the whole of the Union 
territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.  

3 
3. Power to make a declaration.—(1) Any person who satisfies the prescribed authority— 
(a) that he is a Muslim, and 
(b) that he is competent to contract within the meaning of section 11 of the Indian Contract                
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), and 
(c) that he is a resident of 1[the territories to which this Act extends], 
may by declaration in the prescribed form and filed before the prescribed authority declare that he desires 
to obtain the benefit of 2[the provisions of this section], and thereafter the provisions of section 2 shall 
apply to the declarant and all his minor children and their descendants as if in addition to the matters 
enumerated therein adoption, wills and legacies were also specified. 
(2) Where the prescribed authority refuses to accept a declaration under sub-section (1), the person 
desiring to make the same may appeal to such office as the State Government may, by general or special 
order, appoint in this behalf, and such officer may, if he is satisfied that the appellant is entitled to make 
the declaration, order the prescribed authority to accept the same. 
4. Rule-making power.—(1) The State Government may make rules to carry into effect the purposes 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) for prescribing the authority before whom and the form in which declaration under this Act 
shall be made; 
(b) for prescribing the fees to be paid for the filing of declarations and for the attendance at 
private residences of any person in the discharge of his duties under this Act; and for prescribing the 
times at which such fees shall be payable and the manner in which they shall be levied. 
(3) Rules made under the provisions of this section shall be published, in the Official Gazette and 
shall thereupon have effect as if enacted in this Act. 
3[(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as it is made, 
before the State Legislature.] 
5. [Dissolution of marriage by Court in certain circumstances.]—Rep. by the Dissolution of Muslim 
Marriages Act, 1939 (8 of 1939), s. 6 (w.e.f. 17-3-1939). 
6. Repeals.—4[The under mentioned provisions] of the Acts and Regulations mentioned below shall 
be repealed in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, namely:— 
(1) Section 26 of the Bombay Regulation IV of 1827; 
(2) Section 16 of the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873 (3 of 1873); 
5* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(4) Section 3 of the Oudh Laws Act, 1876 (18 of 1876); 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for “a Part A State or a Part C State”. 
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 1943, s. 2, for “this Act” (w.e.f. 7-4-1943). 
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-3-1984). 
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1943, s. 3, for “Provisions” (w.e.f. 7-4-1943). 
5. Entry (3) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-4-1943). 

4 
(5) Section 5 of the Punjab Laws Act, 1872 (4 of 1872); 
(6) Section 5 of the Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875 (20 of 1875); and 
(7) Section 4 of the Ajmere Laws Regulation, 1877 (3 of 1877). 
 
 
——————— 
