
================================================================================
  📄 Arbitration and Conciliation Act.pdf
     Pages: 52
================================================================================
1 
 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996 
_______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
 
_______ 
PREAMBLE 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS. 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
PART I 
ARBITRATION 
CHAPTER I 
General provisions 
2. Definitions. 
3. Receipt of written communications. 
4. Waiver of right to object. 
5. Extent of judicial intervention. 
6. Administrative assistance. 
CHAPTER II 
Arbitration agreement 
7. Arbitration agreement. 
8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement. 
9. Interim measures, etc., by Court. 
CHAPTER III 
Composition of arbitral tribunal 
10. Number of arbitrators. 
11. Appointment of arbitrators. 
11A. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule. 
12. Grounds for challenge. 
13. Challenge procedure. 
14. Failure or impossibility to act. 
15. Termination of mandate and substitution of arbitrator. 
CHAPTER IV 
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals 
16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction. 
17. Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal. 
CHAPTER V 
Conduct of arbitral proceedings 
18. Equal treatment of parties. 
19. Determination of rules of procedure. 
20. Place of arbitration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
SECTIONS. 
21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings. 
22. Language. 
23. Statements of claim and defence. 
24. Hearings and written proceedings. 
25. Default of a party. 
26. [Omitted.]. 
27. Court assistance in taking evidence. 
CHAPTER VI 
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings 
28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute. 
29. Decision making by panel of arbitrators. 
29A.Time limit for arbitral award. 
29B. Fast track procedure. 
30. Settlement. 
31. Form and contents of arbitral award. 
31A. Regime for costs. 
32. Termination of proceedings. 
33. Correction and interpretation of award; additional award. 
CHAPTER VII 
Recourse against arbitral award 
34. Application for setting aside arbitral awards. 
CHAPTER VIII 
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards 
35. Finality of arbitral awards. 
36. Enforcement. 
CHAPTER IX 
Appeals 
37. Appealable orders. 
CHAPTER X 
Miscellaneous 
38. Deposits. 
39. Lien on arbitral award and deposits as to costs. 
40. Arbitration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto. 
41. Provisions in case of insolvency. 
42. Jurisdiction. 
42A. Confidentiality of information. 
42B.  Protection of action taken in good faith. 
43. Limitations. 
PART IA 
ARBITRATION COUNCIL OF INDIA 
43A. Definitions. 
43B. Establishment and incorporation of Arbitration Council of India. 
43C. Composition of Council. 
43D. Duties and functions of Council. 
43E. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council. 
43F. Resignation of Members. 

3 
 
SECTIONS. 
43G. Removal of Member. 
43H. Appointment of experts and constitution of Committees thereof. 
43-I. General norms for grading of arbitral institutions. 
43J. Norms for accreditation of arbitrators. 
43K. Depository of awards. 
43L. Power to make regulations by Council. 
43M. Chief Executive Officer. 
PART II 
ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS 
CHAPTER I 
New York Convention Awards 
44. Definition. 
45. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration. 
46. When foreign award binding. 
47. Evidence. 
48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards. 
49. Enforcement of foreign awards. 
50. Appealable orders. 
51. Saving. 
52. Chapter II not to apply. 
CHAPTER II 
Geneva Convention Awards 
53. Interpretation. 
54. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration. 
55. Foreign awards when binding. 
56. Evidence. 
57. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards. 
58. Enforcement of foreign awards. 
59. Appealable orders. 
60. Savings. 
PART III 
CONCILIATION 
61. Application and scope. 
62. Commencement of conciliation proceedings. 
63. Number of conciliators. 
64. Appointment of conciliators. 
65. Submission of statements to conciliator. 
66. Conciliator not bound by certain enactments. 
67. Role of conciliator. 
68. Administrative assistance. 
69. Communication between conciliator and parties. 
70. Disclosure of information. 
71. Co-operation of parties with conciliator. 
72. Suggestions by parties for settlement of dispute. 
73. Settlement agreement. 
74. Status and effect of settlement agreement. 
75. Confidentiality. 

4 
 
SECTIONS 
76. Termination of conciliation proceedings. 
77. Resort to arbitral or judicial proceedings. 
78. Costs. 
79. Deposits. 
80. Role of conciliator in other proceedings. 
81. Admissibility of evidence in other proceedings. 
PART IV 
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS 
82. Power of High Court to make rules. 
83. Removal of difficulties. 
84. Power to make rules. 
85. Repeal and savings. 
86. Repeal and saving. 
87. Effect of arbitral and related court proceedings commenced prior to 23rd October, 2015. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE. 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE. 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
APPENDIX. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996 
ACT No. 26 OF 1996 
[16th August, 1996.] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, international 
commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards as also to define the law 
relating to conciliation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
Preamble.—WHEREAS the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) 
has adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration in 1985; 
ANDWHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended that all countries give 
due consideration to the said Model Law, in view of the desirability of uniformity of the law of arbitral 
procedures and the specific needs of international commercial arbitration practice; 
ANDWHEREAS the UNCITRAL has adopted the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules in 1980; 
ANDWHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended the use of the said 
Rules in cases where a dispute arises in the context of international commercial relations and the parties 
seek an amicable settlement of that dispute by recourse to conciliation; 
ANDWHEREAS the said Model Law and Rules make significant contribution to the establishment of a 
unified legal framework for the fair and efficient settlement of disputes arising in international 
commercial relations; 
ANDWHEREAS it is expedient to make law respecting arbitration and conciliation, taking into account 
the aforesaid Model Law and Rules; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India: 
1*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
PART I 
ARBITRATION 
CHAPTER I 
General provisions 
2. Definitions.—(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “arbitration” means any arbitration whether or not administered by permanent arbitral 
institution; 
(b) “arbitration agreement” means an agreement referred to in section 7; 
                                                           
1. The proviso and Explanation omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, 
vide notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020). 
2. 22nd August, 1996, vide notification No. G.S.R 375(E), dated 22nd August, 1996, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(i).  

6 
 
 
(c) “arbitral award” includes an interim award; 
 
(d) “arbitral tribunal” means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators; 
1[(e) “Court” means— 
(i) in the case of an arbitration other than international commercial arbitration, the principal 
Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the 
subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit, but does not 
include any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small 
Causes; 
(ii) in the case of international commercial arbitration, the High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the 
subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit, and in other 
cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to that 
High Court;] 
(f) “international commercial arbitration” means an arbitration relating to disputes arising out of 
legal relationships, whether contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in 
India and where at least one of the parties is— 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country other than India; 
or 
(ii) a body corporate which is incorporated in any country other than India; or 
(iii) 2*** an association or a body of individuals whose central management and control is 
exercised in any country other than India; or 
(iv) the Government of a foreign country; 
(g) “legal representative” means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, 
and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased, and, where a party acts in a 
representative character, the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so acting; 
(h) “party” means a party to an arbitration agreement. 
(2) This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India: 
3[Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary, the provisions of sections 9, 27 and clause (a) 
of sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of section37 shall also apply to international commercial 
arbitration, even if the place of arbitration is outside India, and an arbitral award made or to be made in 
such place is enforceable and recognised under the provisions of Part II of this Act.] 
(3) This Part shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by virtue of which certain 
disputes may not be submitted to arbitration. 
(4) This Part except sub-section (1) of section 40, sections 41 and 43 shall apply to every arbitration 
under any other enactment for the time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration 
agreement and as if that other enactment were an arbitration agreement, except in so far as the provisions 
of this Part are inconsistent with that other enactment or with any rules made thereunder. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), and save in so far as is otherwise provided by any law 
for the time being in force or in any agreement in force between India and any other country or countries, 
this Part shall apply to all arbitrations and to all proceedings relating thereto. 
(6) Where this Part, except section 28, leaves the parties free to determine a certain issue, that 
freedom shall include the right of the parties to authorise any person including an institution, to determine 
that issue. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 2, for clause (e) (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. The words “a company or” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e. f. 23-10-2015). 

7 
 
(7) An arbitral award made under this Part shall be considered as a domestic award. 
(8) Where this Part— 
(a) refers to the fact that the parties have agreed or that they may agree, or 
(b) in any other way refers to an agreement of the parties, 
that agreement shall include any arbitration rules referred to in that agreement. 
(9) Where this Part, other than clause (a) of section 25 or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 32, 
refers to a claim, it shall also apply to a counterclaim, and where it refers to a defence, it shall also apply 
to a defence to that counterclaim. 
3. Receipt of written communications.—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties,— 
(a) any written communication is deemed to have been received if it is delivered to the addressee 
personally or at his place of business, habitual residence or mailing address, and 
(b) if none of the places referred to in clause (a) can be found after making a reasonable inquiry, a 
written communication is deemed to have been received if it is sent to the addressee's last known 
place of business, habitual residence or mailing address by registered letter or by any other means 
which provides a record of the attempt to deliver it. 
(2) The communication is deemed to have been received on the day it is so delivered. 
(3) This section does not apply to written communications in respect of proceedings of any judicial 
authority. 
4. Waiver of right to object.—A party who knows that— 
(a) any provision of this Part from which the parties may derogate, or 
(b) any requirement under the arbitration agreement, 
has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration without stating his objection to such 
non-compliance without undue delay or, if a time limit is provided for stating that objection, within that 
period of time, shall be deemed to have waived his right to so object. 
5. Extent of judicial intervention.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so 
provided in this Part. 
6. Administrative assistance.—In order to facilitate the conduct of the arbitral proceedings, the 
parties, or the arbitral tribunal with the consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance 
by a suitable institution or person. 
CHAPTER II 
Arbitration agreement 
7. Arbitration agreement.—(1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an agreement by the 
parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them 
in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not. 
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of 
a separate agreement. 
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing. 
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in— 
(a) a document signed by the parties; 
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication 1[including 
communication through electronic means] which provide a record of the agreement; or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 3 (w. e. f. 23-10-2015). 

8 
 
(c) an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of the agreement is 
alleged by one party and not denied by the other. 
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an 
arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and the reference is such as to make that arbitration 
clause part of the contract. 
8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement.—1[(1)A judicial 
authority, before which an action is brought in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement 
shall, if a party to the arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or under him, so applies not 
later than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute, then, notwithstanding 
any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or any Court, refer the parties to arbitration unless it 
finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists.] 
(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied by 
the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy thereof: 
2[Provided that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available 
with the party applying for reference to arbitration under sub-section (1), and the said agreement or 
certified copy is retained by the other party to that agreement, then, the party so applying shall file such 
application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying the Court to call upon 
the other party to produce the original arbitration agreement or its duly certified copy before that Court.] 
(3) Notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub-section (1) and that the issue is 
pending before the judicial authority, an arbitration may be commenced or continued and an arbitral 
award made. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).— 
Insertion of section 8A and section 8B.—After section 8, insert the following sections, namely:– 
“8A. Power of the court, seized of petitions under sections 9 or 11 of the Act, to refer the 
dispute to Mediation or Conciliation.—(1) If during the pendency of petitions under sections 9 or 
11 of the Act, it appears to the court, that there exists elements of a settlement which may be 
acceptable to the parties, the court may, with the consent of parties, refer the parties, for resolution of 
their disputes, to,-  
(a) mediation; or  
(b) conciliation. 
(2) The procedure for reference of a dispute to mediation is as under– 
(a) where a dispute has been referred for resolution by recourse to mediation, the procedure 
framed under that Act shall apply; 
(b) in case of a successful resolution of the dispute, the Mediator shall immediately forward 
the mediated settlement to the referral court; 
(c) on receipt of the mediated settlement, the referral court shall independently apply its 
judicial mind and record a satisfaction that the mediated settlement is genuine, lawful, voluntary, 
entered into without coercion, undue influence, fraud or misrepresentation and that there is no 
other legal impediment in accepting the same; 
(d) the court shall record a statement on oath of the parties, or their authorised 
representatives, affirming the mediated settlement as well as a clear undertaking of the parties to 
abide by the terms of the settlement; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 4, for sub-section (1) (w. e. f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

9 
 
(e) if satisfied, the court shall pass an order in terms of the settlement; 
(f) if the main petition, in which the reference was made is pending, it shall be disposed of by 
the referral court in terms thereof; 
(g) if the main petition, in which the reference was made stands disposed of, the mediated 
settlement and the matter shall be listed before the referral court, which shall pass orders in 
accordance with clauses (iii), (iv) and (v); 
(h) such a mediated settlement, shall have the same status and effect as an arbitral award and 
may be enforced in the manner specified under section 36 of the Act. 
(3) With respect to reference of a dispute to conciliation, the provisions of Part II of this Act shall 
apply as if the conciliation proceedings were initiated by the parties under the relevant provision of 
this Act. 
8B. Power of the court, seized of matters under sections 34 or 37 of the Act, to refer the 
dispute to Mediation or Conciliation.—(1) If during the pendency of a petition under section 34 or 
an appeal under section 37 of the Act, it appears to the court, that there exists elements of a settlement 
which may be acceptable to the parties, the court may, with the consent of parties, refer the parties, 
for resolution of their disputes, to:–  
(a) mediation; or 
 (b) conciliation. 
(2) The procedure for reference of a dispute to mediation is as under:- 
(a) where a dispute has been referred for resolution by recourse to mediation, the procedure 
framed under the Act shall apply; 
(b) in case of a successful resolution of the dispute, the Mediator shall immediately forward 
the mediated settlement to the referral court; 
(c) on receipt of the mediated settlement, the referral court shall independently apply its 
judicial mind and record a satisfaction that the mediated settlement is genuine, lawful, 
voluntary, entered into without coercion, undue influence, fraud or misrepresentation and that 
there is no other legal impediment in accepting the same; 
(d) the court shall record a statement on oath of the parties, or their authorized 
representatives, affirming the mediated settlement, a clear undertaking of the parties to abide by 
the terms of the settlement as well as statement to the above effect; 
(e) if satisfied, the court shall pass an order in terms of the settlement; 
(f) if the main petition, in which the reference was made is pending, it shall be disposed of 
by the referral court in terms thereof; 
(g) if the main petition, in which the reference was made stands disposed of, the mediated 
settlement and the matter shall be listed before the referral court, which shall pass orders in 
accordance with clauses (iii), (iv) and (v); 
(h) such a mediated settlement, shall have the status of a modified arbitral award and may 
be enforced in the manner specified under section 36 of the Act. 
(3) With respect to reference of a dispute to conciliation, the provisions of Part III of the Act, 
shall apply as if the conciliation proceedings were initiated by the parties under the relevant provision 
of this Act.” 
 

10 
 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.3774(E), dated (23-10-2020).] 
9. Interim measures, etc., by Court.—1[(1)]A party may, before or during arbitral proceedings or at 
any time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36, 
apply to a court— 
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of 
arbitral proceedings; or 
(ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject-matter of the 
arbitration agreement; 
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration; 
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the subject-
matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may arise therein and authorising 
for any of the aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in the possession 
of any party, or authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or experiment 
to be tried, which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or 
evidence; 
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver; 
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the Court to be just and 
convenient, 
and the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has for the purpose of, and in relation 
to, any proceedings before it. 
2[(2) Where, before the commencement of the arbitral proceedings, a Court passes an order for any 
interim measure of protection under sub-section (1), the arbitral proceedings shall be commenced within a 
period of ninety days from the date of such order or within such further time as the Court may determine. 
(3) Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the Court shall not entertain an application under 
sub-section (1), unless the Court finds that circumstances exist which may not render the remedy provided 
under section 17 efficacious.] 
CHAPTER III 
Composition of arbitral tribunal 
10. Number of arbitrators.—(1) The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, 
provided that such number shall not be an even number. 
(2) Failing the determination referred to in sub-section (1), the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole 
arbitrator. 
11. Appointment of arbitrators.—(1) A person of any nationality may be an arbitrator, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties. 
(2) Subject to sub-section (6), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator 
or arbitrators. 
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each 
party shall appoint one arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who 
shall act as the presiding arbitrator. 
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section (3) applies and— 
(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the receipt of a request to do so 
from the other party; or 
                                                           
1. Section 9 shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by s. 5, Act 3 of 2016 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

11 
 
(b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator within thirty days from the 
date of their appointment, 
the appointment shall be made, upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, 
the High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court]; 
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), in an arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the 
parties fail to agree on the arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a request by one party from the 
other party to so agree the appointment shall be made, upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Court or, 
as the case may be, the High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court]. 
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,— 
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or 
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement expected of them under 
that procedure; or 
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted to him or it under 
that procedure, 
a party may request 1[the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or any person or 
institution designated by such Court]to take the necessary measure, unless the agreement on the 
appointment procedure provides other means for securing the appointment. 
2[(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, while considering any application 
under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or 
order of any Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement. 
(6B) The designation of any person or institution by the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, for the purposes of this section shall not be regarded as a delegation of judicial power by the 
Supreme Court or the High Court.] 
(7) A decision on a matter entrusted by sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to 3[the 
Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated by such 
Court is final and no appeal including Letters Patent Appeal shall lie against such decision]. 
4[(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated 
by such Court, before appointing an arbitrator, shall seek a disclosure in writing from the prospective 
arbitrator in terms of sub-section (1) of section 12, and have due regard to— 
(a) any qualifications required for the arbitrator by the agreement of the parties; and 
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other considerations as are likely to secure the appointment 
of an independent and impartial arbitrator.] 
(9) In the case of appointment of sole or third arbitrator in an international commercial arbitration, 
5[the Supreme Court or the person or institution designated by that Court] may appoint an arbitrator of a 
nationality other than the nationalities of the parties where the parties belong to different nationalities. 
6[(10) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, may make such scheme as the said 
Court may deem appropriate for dealing with matters entrusted by sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or 
sub-section (6), to it.] 
(11) Where more than one request has been made under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or                    
sub-section (6) to the Chief Justices of different High Courts or their designates, 7[different High Courts 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6, for “the Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by him” (w. e. f. 23-10-2015). 
 
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the Chief Justice or the person  or institution designated by him is final” (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub-section (8) (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the Chief Justice of India of India or the person or institution designated by him” (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub-section (10) (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the Chief Justices of different High Courts or their designates, the Chief Justice or his designate to 
whom the request has been first made” (w.e.f 23-10-2015). 

12 
 
or their designates, the High Court or its designate to whom the request has been first made] under the 
relevant sub-section shall alone be competent to decide on the request. 
1[(12) (a) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub-section (10) arise 
in an international commercial arbitration, the reference to the “Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court” in those sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the “Supreme Court”; and 
(b) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub-section (10) arise in any 
other arbitration, the reference to “the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court” in those 
sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the “High Court” within whose local limits the principal 
Civil Court referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 is situate, and where the High Court 
itself is the Court referred to in that clause, to that High Court.] 
2[(13) An application made under this section for appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators shall be 
disposed of by the Supreme Court or the High Court or the person or institution designated by such Court, 
as the case maybe, as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter 
within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.  
(14) For the purpose of determination of the fees of the arbitral tribunal and the manner of its 
payment to the arbitral tribunal, the High Court may frame such rules as may be necessary, after taking 
into consideration the rates specified in the Fourth Schedule. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this sub-section shall not apply to 
international commercial arbitration and in arbitrations (other than international commercial arbitration) 
in case where parties have agreed for determination of fees as per the rules of an arbitral institution.] 
3[11A. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule.—(1) If the Central Government 
is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Fourth Schedule and thereupon the Fourth Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended 
accordingly. 
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by the both Houses of Parliament.] 
12. Grounds for challenge.—4[(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible 
appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any circumstances,— 
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or present relationship with or 
interest in any of the parties or in relation to the subject-matter in dispute, whether financial, business, 
professional or other kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or 
impartiality; and 
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to the arbitration and in 
particular his ability to complete the entire arbitration within a period of twelve months. 
Explanation1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall guide in determining whether 
circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an 
arbitrator. 
Explanation 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such person in the form specified in the Sixth 
Schedule.] 
(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall, 
without delay, disclose to the parties in writing any circumstances referred to in sub-section (1) unless 
they have already been informed of them by him. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6, for sub-section (12) (w.e.f.  23-10-2015). 
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid.(w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f.  23-10-2015). 

13 
 
 
 
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if— 
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, 
or 
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties. 
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose appointment he has 
participated, only for reasons of which he becomes aware after the appointment has been made. 
1[(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person whose relationship, with the 
parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the 
Seventh Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability 
of this sub-section by an express agreement in writing.]  
13. Challenge procedure.—(1) Subject to sub-section (4), the parties are free to agree on a procedure 
for challenging an arbitrator. 
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator 
shall, within fifteen days after becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after 
becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in sub-section (3) of section 12, send a written 
statement of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal. 
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section (2) withdraws from his office or the other party 
agrees to the challenge, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge. 
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure under sub-
section (2) is not successful, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the arbitral proceedings and make an 
arbitral award. 
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub-section (4), the party challenging the arbitrator may 
make an application for setting aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34. 
(6) Where an arbitral award is set aside on an application made under sub-section (5), the Court may 
decide as to whether the arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any fees. 
14. Failure or impossibility to act.—(1) 2[The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate and he shall 
be substituted by another arbitrator, if]— 
(a) he becomes de jure or de facto unable to perform his functions or for other reasons fails to act 
without undue delay; and 
(b) he withdraws from his office or the parties agree to the termination of his mandate. 
(2) If a controversy remains concerning any of the grounds referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), 
a party may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the Court to decide on the termination of the 
mandate. 
(3) If, under this section or sub-section (3) of section 13, an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a 
party agrees to the termination of the mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not imply acceptance of the validity 
of any ground referred to in this section or sub-section (3) of section 12. 
15. Termination of mandate and substitution of arbitrator.—(1) In addition to the circumstances 
referred to in section 13 or section 14,the mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate— 
(a) where he withdraws from office for any reason; or 
(b) by or pursuant to agreement of the parties. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for  “The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if” (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

14 
 
(2) Where the mandate of an arbitrator terminates, a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed according 
to the rules that were applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator being replaced. 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where an arbitrator is replaced under sub-section (2), any 
hearings previously held maybe repeated at the discretion of the arbitral tribunal. 
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an order or ruling of the arbitral tribunal made prior to the 
replacement of an arbitrator under this section shall not be invalid solely because there has been a change 
in the composition of the arbitral tribunal. 
CHAPTER IV 
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals 
16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction.—(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule 
on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the 
arbitration agreement, and for that purpose,— 
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an agreement 
independent of the other terms of the contract; and 
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the 
invalidity of the arbitration clause. 
(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the 
submission of the statement of defence; however, a party shall not be precluded from raising such a plea 
merely because that he has appointed, or participated in the appointment of, an arbitrator. 
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority shall be raised as soon as the 
matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings. 
(4) The arbitral tribunal may, in either of the cases referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), 
admit a later plea if it considers the delay justified. 
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) and, 
where the arbitral tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitral proceedings and 
make an arbitral award. 
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting aside such an 
arbitral award in accordance with section 34. 
1[17. Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal.—(1) A party may, during the arbitral 
proceedings 2***, apply to the arbitral tribunal— 
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of 
arbitral proceedings; or 
(ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject-matter of the 
arbitration agreement; 
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration; 
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the subject-
matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may arise therein and authorising 
for any of the aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in the possession 
of any party, or authorising any samples to be taken, or any observation to be made, or 
experiment to be tried, which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full 
information or evidence; 
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 10, for section 17 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. The words and figures “or at any time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with 
section 36” omitted by Act 33 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 

15 
 
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the arbitral tribunal to be just 
and convenient, 
and the arbitral tribunal shall have the same power for making orders, as the court has for the purpose of, 
and in relation to, any proceedings before it. 
(2) Subject to any orders passed in an appeal under section 37, any order issued by the arbitral 
tribunal under this section shall be deemed to be an order of the Court for all purposes and shall be 
enforceable under the Code of Civil Procedure,1908 (5 of 1908), in the same manner as if it were an order 
of the Court.] 
CHAPTER V 
Conduct of arbitral proceedings 
18. Equal treatment of parties.—The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be 
given a full opportunity to present this case. 
19. Determination of rules of procedure.—(1) The arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 
(2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral 
tribunal in conducting its proceedings. 
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), the arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part, 
conduct the proceedings in the manner it considers appropriate. 
(4) The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (3) includes the power to determine the 
admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of any evidence. 
20. Place of arbitration.—(1) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration. 
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), the place of arbitration shall be determined 
by the arbitral tribunal having regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience of the 
parties. 
(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the arbitral tribunal may, unless otherwise 
agreed by the parties, meet at anyplace it considers appropriate for consultation among its members, for 
hearing witnesses, experts or the parties, or for inspection of documents, goods or other property. 
21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings.—Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
proceedings in respect of a particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that dispute to 
be referred to arbitration is received by the respondent. 
22. Language.—(1) The parties are free to agree upon the language or languages to be used in the 
arbitral proceedings. 
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), the arbitral tribunal shall determine the 
language or languages to be used in the arbitral proceedings. 
(3) The agreement or determination, unless otherwise specified, shall apply to any written statement 
by a party, any hearing and any arbitral award, decision or other communication by the arbitral tribunal. 
(4) The arbitral tribunal may order that any documentary evidence shall be accompanied by a 
translation into the language or languages agreed upon by the parties or determined by the arbitral 
tribunal. 
23. Statements of claim and defence.—(1) Within the period of time agreed upon by the parties or 
determined by the arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall state the facts supporting his claim, the points at 
issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the respondent shall state his defence in respect of these 
particulars, unless the parties have otherwise agreed as to the required elements of those statements. 
(2) The parties may submit with their statements all documents they consider to be relevant or may 
add a reference to the documents or other evidence they will submit. 
1[(2A) The respondent, in support of his case, may also submit a counterclaim or plead a set-off, 
which shall be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such counterclaim or set-off falls within the 
scope of the arbitration agreement.] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 11 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

16 
 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party may amend or supplement his claim or 
defence during the course of the arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate 
to allow the amendment or supplement having regard to the delay in making it. 
1[(4) The statement of claim and defence under this section shall be completed within a period of six 
months from the date the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be, received notice, in writing of 
their appointment.] 
24. Hearings and written proceedings.—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal shall decide whether to hold oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument, 
or whether the proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of documents and other materials: 
Provided that the arbitral tribunal shall hold oral hearings, at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, 
on a request by a party, unless the parties have agreed that no oral hearing shall be held: 
2[Provided further that the arbitral tribunal shall, as far as possible, hold oral hearings for the 
presentation of evidence or for oral argument on day-to-day basis, and not grant any adjournments unless 
sufficient cause is made out, and may impose costs including exemplary costs on the party seeking 
adjournment without any sufficient cause.] 
(2) The parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and of any meeting of the 
arbitral tribunal for the purposes of inspection of documents, goods or other property. 
(3) All statements, documents or other information supplied to, or applications made to the arbitral 
tribunal by one party shall be communicated to the other party, and any expert report or evidentiary 
document on which the arbitral tribunal may rely in making its decision shall be communicated to the 
parties. 
25. Default of a party.—Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where, without showing sufficient 
cause,— 
(a) the claimant fails to communicate his statement of claim in accordance with sub-section (1) of 
section 23, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings; 
(b) the respondent fails to communicate his statement of defence in accordance with sub-section 
(1) of section 23, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the proceedings without treating that failure in 
itself as an admission of the allegations by the claimant 3[and shall have the discretion to treat the 
right of the respondent to file such statement of defence as having been forfeited]. 
(c) a party fails to appear at an oral hearing or to produce documentary evidence, the arbitral 
tribunal may continue the proceedings and make the arbitral award on the evidence before it. 
26. Expert appointed by arbitral tribunal.—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal may— 
(a) appoint one or more experts to report to it on specific issues to be determined by the arbitral 
tribunal, and 
(b) require a party to give the expert any relevant information or to produce, or to provide access 
to, any relevant documents, goods or other property for his inspection. 
(2) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, if a party so requests or if the arbitral tribunal considers it 
necessary, the expert shall, after delivery of his written or oral report, participate in an oral hearing where 
the parties have the opportunity to put questions to him and to present expert witnesses in order to testify 
on the points at issue. 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the expert shall, on the request of a party, make available 
to that party for examination all documents, goods or other property in the possession of the expert with 
which he was provided in order to prepare his report. 
27. Court assistance in taking evidence.—(1) The arbitral tribunal, or a party with the approval of 
the arbitral tribunal, may apply to the Court for assistance in taking evidence. 
(2) The application shall specify— 
(a) the names and addresses of the parties and the arbitrators; 
(b) the general nature of the claim and the relief sought; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 12 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

17 
 
(c) the evidence to be obtained, in particular,— 
(i) the name and address of any person to be heard as witness or expert witness and a 
statement of the subject-matter of the testimony required; 
(ii) the description of any document to be produced or property to be inspected. 
(3) The Court may, within its competence and according to its rules on taking evidence, execute the 
request by ordering that the evidence be provided directly to the arbitral tribunal. 
(4) The Court may, while making an order under sub-section (3), issue the same processes to 
witnesses as it may issue in suits tried before it. 
(5) Persons failing to attend in accordance with such process, or making any other default, or refusing 
to give their evidence, or guilty of any contempt to the arbitral tribunal during the conduct of arbitral 
proceedings, shall be subject to the like disadvantages, penalties and punishments by order of the Court 
on the representation of the arbitral tribunal as they would incur for the like offences in suits tried before 
the Court. 
(6) In this section the expression “Processes” includes summonses and commissions for the 
examination of witnesses and summonses to produce documents. 
CHAPTER VI 
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings 
28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute.—(1) Where the place of arbitration is situate in 
India,— 
(a) in an arbitration other than an international commercial arbitration, the arbitral tribunal shall 
decide the dispute submitted to arbitration in accordance with the substantive law for the time being 
in force in India; 
(b) in international commercial arbitration,— 
(i) the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the rules of law designated 
by the parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute; 
(ii) any designation by the parties of the law or legal system of a given country shall be 
construed, unless otherwise expressed, as directly referring to the substantive law of that country 
and not to its conflict of laws rules; 
(iii) failing any designation of the law under clause (a) by the parties, the arbitral tribunal 
shall apply the rules of law it considers to be appropriate given all the circumstances surrounding 
the dispute. 
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aequoet bono or as amiable compositeur only if the parties 
have expressly authorised it to do so. 
1[(3) While deciding and making an award, the arbitral tribunal shall, in all cases, take into account 
the terms of the contract and trade usages applicable to the transaction.] 
29.Decision making by panel of arbitrators.—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in arbitral 
proceedings with more than one arbitrator, any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a 
majority of all its members. 
(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), if authorised by the parties or all the members of the arbitral 
tribunal, questions of procedure may be decided by the presiding arbitrator. 
2 [29A. Time limit for arbitral award.— 3 [(1)The award in matters other than international 
commercial arbitration shall be made by the arbitral tribunal within a period of twelve months from the 
date of completion of pleadings under sub-section (4) of section 23: 
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial arbitration may be made as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavor may be made to dispose of the matter within a period of twelve 
months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub-section (4) of section 23.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 14, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 6, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 

18 
 
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon 
the reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to receive such amount of additional fees as the parties 
may agree. 
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub-section (1) for making award for a 
further period not exceeding six months. 
(4) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section (1) or the extended period 
specified under sub-section (3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall terminate unless the Court has, 
either prior to or after the expiry of the period so specified, extended the period: 
Provided that while extending the period under this sub-section, if the Court finds that the 
proceedings have been delayed for the reasons attributable to the arbitral tribunal, then, it may order 
reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding five per cent. for each month of such delay. 
1[Provided further that where an application under sub-section (5) is pending, the mandate of the 
arbitrator shall continue till the disposal of the said application: 
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being heard before the fees is 
reduced.] 
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub-section (4) may be on the application of any of the 
parties and may be granted only for sufficient cause and on such terms and conditions as may be imposed 
by the Court. 
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub-section (4), it shall be open to the Court to substitute 
one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all of the arbitrators are substituted, the arbitral proceedings shall 
continue from the stage already reached and on the basis of the evidence and material already on record, 
and the arbitrator(s) appointed under this section shall be deemed to have received the said evidence and 
material. 
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the arbitral tribunal thus 
reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously appointed arbitral tribunal. 
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actual or exemplary costs upon any of the parties under this 
section. 
(9) An application filed under sub-section (5) shall be disposed of by the Court as expeditiously as 
possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter within a period of sixty days from the date 
of service of notice on the opposite party. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).— 
Amendment of sections 29A.— 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––  
“(1) The award shall be made within a period of twelve months from the date the arbitral tribunal 
enters upon the reference. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, an arbitral tribunal shall be deemed to have 
entered upon the reference on the date on which the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may 
be, have received notice, in writing, of their appointment.”; 
(b) in sub-section (4), omit second and third provisos. 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020).] 
29B. Fast track procedure.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the parties to an 
arbitration agreement, may, at any stage either before or at the time of appointment of the arbitral tribunal, 
agree in writing to have their dispute resolved by fast track procedure specified in sub-section (3). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 

19 
 
(2) The parties to the arbitration agreement, while agreeing for resolution of dispute by fast track 
procedure, may agree that the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole arbitrator who shall be chosen by the 
parties. 
(3) The arbitral tribunal shall follow the following procedure while conducting arbitration 
proceedings under sub-section (1):— 
(a) The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of written pleadings, documents and 
submissions filed by the parties without any oral hearing; 
(b) The arbitral tribunal shall have power to call for any further information or clarification from 
the parties in addition to the pleadings and documents filed by them; 
(c) An oral hearing may be held only, if, all the parties make a request or if the arbitral tribunal 
considers it necessary to have oral hearing for clarifying certain issues; 
(d) The arbitral tribunal may dispense with any technical formalities, if an oral hearing is held, 
and adopt such procedure as deemed appropriate for expeditious disposal of the case. 
(4) The award under this section shall be made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral 
tribunal enters upon the reference. 
(5) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section (4), the provisions of sub-
sections (3) to (9) of section 29A shall apply to the proceedings. 
(6) The fees payable to the arbitrator and the manner of payment of the fees shall be such as may be 
agreed between the arbitrator and the parties.] 
30. Settlement.—(1) It is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for an arbitral tribunal to 
encourage settlement of the dispute and, with the agreement of the parties, the arbitral tribunal may use 
mediation, conciliation or other procedures at any time during the arbitral proceedings to encourage 
settlement. 
(2) If, during arbitral proceedings, the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the 
proceedings and, if requested by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record the 
settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms. 
(3) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall be made in accordance with section 31 and shall state that 
it is an arbitral award. 
(4) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall have the same status and effect as any other arbitral award 
on the substance of the dispute. 
31. Form and contents of arbitral award.—(1) An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall 
be signed by the members of the arbitral tribunal. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), in arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator, the 
signatures of the majority of all the members of the arbitral tribunal shall be sufficient so long as the 
reason for any omitted signature is stated. 
(3) The arbitral award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless— 
(a) the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or 
(b) the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under section 30. 
(4) The arbitral award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as determined in accordance with 
section 20 and the award shall be deemed to have been made at that place. 
(5) After the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each party. 
(6) The arbitral tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings, make an interim arbitral 
award on any matter with respect to which it may make a final arbitral award. 
(7) (a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far as an arbitral award is for the 
payment of money, the arbitral tribunal may include in the sum for which the award is made interest, at 
such rate as it deems reasonable, on the whole or any part of the money, for the whole or any part of the 
period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on which the award is made. 

20 
 
1[(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless the award otherwise directs, carry 
interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the current rate of interest prevalent on the date of award, 
from the date of award to the date of payment. 
Explanation.—The expression “current rate of interest” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
under clause (b) of section 2 of the Interest Act, 1978 (14 of 1978).] 
2[(8) The costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal in accordance with section 31A.] 
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (a), “costs” means reasonable costs relating to— 
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses, 
(ii) legal fees and expenses, 
(iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration, and 
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings and the arbitral 
award. 
3[31A. Regime for costs.—(1) In relation to any arbitration proceeding or a proceeding under any of 
the provisions of this Act pertaining to the arbitration, the Court or arbitral tribunal, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,1908 (5 of 1908), shall have the discretion to 
determine— 
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another; 
(b) the amount of such costs; and 
(c) when such costs are to be paid. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, “costs” means reasonable costs relating to— 
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, Courts and witnesses; 
(ii) legal fees and expenses; 
(iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration; and 
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral or Court proceedings and the 
arbitral award. 
(2) If the Court or arbitral tribunal decides to make an order as to payment of costs,— 
(a) the general rule is that the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay the costs of the 
successful party; or 
(b) the Court or arbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
(3) In determining the costs, the Court or arbitral tribunal shall have regard to all the circumstances, 
including— 
(a) the conduct of all the parties; 
(b) whether a party has succeeded partly in the case; 
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counterclaim leading to delay in the disposal of the 
arbitral proceedings; and 
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle the dispute is made by a party and refused by the other 
party. 
(4) The Court or arbitral tribunal may make any order under this section including the order that a 
party shall pay— 
(a) a proportion of another party’s costs; 
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 16, for clause (b) (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 16, for sub-section (8) (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Ins. by s.17, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

21 
 
(c) costs from or until a certain date only; 
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun; 
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings; 
(f) costs relating only to a distinct part of the proceedings; and 
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date. 
(5) An agreement which has the effect that a party is to pay the whole or part of the costs of the 
arbitration in any event shall be only valid if such agreement is made after the dispute in question has 
arisen.] 
32. Termination of proceedings.—(1) The arbitral proceedings shall be terminated by the final 
arbitral award or by an order of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (2). 
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall issue an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings 
where— 
(a) the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects to the order and the 
arbitral tribunal recognises a legitimate interest on his part in obtaining a final settlement of the 
dispute, 
(b) the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or 
(c) the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason 
become unnecessary or impossible. 
(3) Subject to section 33 and sub-section (4) of section 34, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal shall 
terminate with the termination of the arbitral proceedings. 
33. Correction and interpretation of award; additional award.—(1) Within thirty days from the 
receipt of the arbitral award, unless another period of time has been agreed upon by the parties— 
(a) a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to correct any 
computation errors, any clerical or typographical errors or any other errors of a similar nature 
occurring in the award; 
(b) if so agreed by the parties, a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral 
tribunal to give an interpretation of a specific point or part of the award. 
(2) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub-section (1) to be justified, it shall 
make the correction or give the interpretation within thirty days from the receipt of the request and the 
interpretation shall form part of the arbitral award. 
(3) The arbitral tribunal may correct any error of the type referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), 
on its own initiative, within thirty days from the date of the arbitral award. 
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party with notice to the other party, may request, within 
thirty days from the receipt of the arbitral award, the arbitral tribunal to make an additional arbitral award 
as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings but omitted from the arbitral award. 
(5) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub-section (4) to be justified, it shall 
make the additional arbitral award within sixty days from the receipt of such request. 
(6) The arbitral tribunal may extend, if necessary, the period of time within which it shall make a 
correction, give an interpretation or make an additional arbitral award under sub-section (2) or                     
sub-section (5). 
(7) Section 31 shall apply to a correction or interpretation of the arbitral award or to an additional 
arbitral award made under this section. 
CHAPTER VII 
Recourse against arbitral award 
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award.—(1) Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award 
may be made only by an application for setting aside such award in accordance with sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (3). 
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if— 

22 
 
 
(a) the party making the application 1[establishes on the basis of the record of the arbitral tribunal 
that]— 
(i) a party was under some incapacity, or 
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it 
or, failing any indication thereon, under the law for the time being in force; or 
(iii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an 
arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or 
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration: 
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those 
not so submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which contains decisions on matters not 
submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or 
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance 
with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this 
Part from which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance 
with this Part; or 
(b) the Court finds that— 
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law 
for the time being in force, or 
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India. 
2[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,— 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation 
of section 75 or section 81; or 
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice. 
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.] 
3[(2A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations other than international commercial arbitrations, 
may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is vitiated by patent illegality 
appearing on the face of the award: 
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of the 
law or by reappreciation of evidence.] 
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made after three months have elapsed from the date on 
which the party making that application had received the arbitral award or, if a request had been made 
under section 33, from the date on which that request had been disposed of by the arbitral tribunal: 
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
making the application within the said period of three months it may entertain the application within a 
further period of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Court may, where it is appropriate and it is 
so requested by a party, adjourn the proceedings for a period of time determined by it in order to give the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 7, for “furnishes proof that” (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18, for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
3. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

23 
 
arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the arbitral proceedings or to take such other action as in the 
opinion of arbitral tribunal will eliminate the grounds for setting aside the arbitral award. 
1[(5) An application under this section shall be filed by a party only after issuing a prior notice to the 
other party and such application shall be accompanied by an affidavit by the applicant endorsing 
compliance with the said requirement. 
(6) An application under this section shall be disposed of expeditiously, and in any event, within a 
period of one year from the date on which the notice referred to in sub-section (5) is served upon the other 
party.] 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). 
Amendment of section 34.— 
(i) after sub-section (2), insert the following sub-section, namely:— 
“(2A) An arbitral award may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is 
vitiated by patent illegality appearing on the face of the award: 
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of 
the law or by re-appreciation of evidence.”; 
(ii) in sub-section (3),— 
(i) for “three months” substitute, “six months”; 
(ii) in proviso thereto, for, “three months” and “thirty days” substitute respectively “six months” 
and “sixty days”. 
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020).] 
CHAPTER VIII 
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards 
35. Finality of arbitral awards.—Subject to this Part an arbitral award shall be final and binding on 
the parties and persons claiming under them respectively. 
2[36. Enforcement.—(1) Where the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award 
under section 34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), such award shall be 
enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in the same 
manner as if it were a decree of the court. 
(2) Where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in the Court under section 34, 
the filing of such an application shall not by itself render that award unenforceable, unless the Court 
grants an order of stay of the operation of the said arbitral award in accordance with the provisions of  
sub-section (3), on a separate application made for that purpose. 
(3) Upon filing of an application under sub-section (2) for stay of the operation of the arbitral award, 
the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of such award for 
reasons to be recorded in writing: 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 36 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

24 
 
Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for grant of stay in the case of an 
arbitral award for payment of money, have due regard to the provisions for grant of stay of a money 
decree under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).] 
1[Provided further that where the Court is satisfied that a Prima facie case is made out that,— 
(a) the arbitration agreement or contract which is the basis of the award; or 
(b) the making of the award, 
was induced or effected by fraud or corruption, it shall stay the award unconditionally pending disposal of 
the challenge under section 34 to the award. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the above proviso shall apply to 
all court cases arising out of or in relation to arbitral proceedings, irrespective of whether the arbitral or 
court proceedings were commenced prior to or after the commencement of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 (3 of 2016).] 
CHAPTER IX 
Appeals 
37. Appealable orders.—(1) 2[Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, an appeal] shall lie from the following orders (and from no others) to the Court authorised 
by law to hear appeals from original decrees of the Court passing the order, namely:— 
3[(a) refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under section 8; 
 (b) granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9; 
(c) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under section 34.] 
(2) Appeal shall also lie to a court from an order of the arbitral tribunal— 
(a) accepting the plea referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16; or 
(b) granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under section 17. 
(3) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or takeaway any right to appeal to the Supreme Court. 
CHAPTER X 
Miscellaneous 
38. Deposits.—(1) The arbitral tribunal may fix the amount of the deposit or supplementary deposit, 
as the case may be, as an advance for the costs referred to in sub-section (8) of section 31, which it 
expects will be incurred in respect of the claim submitted to it: 
Provided that where, apart from the claim, a counter-claim has been submitted to the arbitral tribunal, 
it may fix separate amount of deposit for the claim and counter-claim. 
(2) The deposit referred to in sub-section (1) shall be payable in equal shares by the parties: 
Provided that where one party fails to pay his share of the deposit, the other party may pay that share: 
Provided further that where the other party also does not pay the aforesaid share in respect of the 
claim or the counter-claim, the arbitral tribunal may suspend or terminate the arbitral proceedings in 
respect of such claim or counter-claim, as the case may be. 
(3) Upon termination of the arbitral proceedings, the arbitral tribunal shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits received and shall return any unexpended balance to the party or parties, as the case 
may be. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2021, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 8, for “An appeal” (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 20, for clauses (a) and (b) (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

25 
 
39. Lien on arbitral award and deposits as to costs.—(1) Subject to the provisions of                   
sub-section (2) and to any provision to the contrary in the arbitration agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall 
have a lien on the arbitral award for any unpaid costs of the arbitration. 
(2) If in any case an arbitral tribunal refuses to deliver its award except on payment of the costs 
demanded by it, the Court may, on an application in this behalf, order that the arbitral tribunal shall 
deliver the arbitral award to the applicant on payment into Court by the applicant of the costs demanded, 
and shall, after such inquiry, if any, as it thinks fit, further order that out of the money so paid into Court 
there shall be paid to the arbitral tribunal by way of costs such sum as the Court may consider reasonable 
and that the balance of the money, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(3) An application under sub-section (2) may be made by any party unless the fees demanded have 
been fixed by written agreement between him and the arbitral tribunal, and the arbitral tribunal shall be 
entitled to appear and be heard on any such application. 
(4) The Court may make such orders as it thinks fit respecting the costs of the arbitration where any 
question arises respecting such costs and the arbitral award contains no sufficient provision concerning 
them. 
40. Arbitration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto.—(1) An arbitration 
agreement shall not be discharged by the death of any party thereto either as respects the deceased or as 
respects any other party, but shall in such event been forceable by or against the legal representative of 
the deceased. 
(2) The mandate of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the death of any party by whom he was 
appointed. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any law by virtue of which any right of action 
is extinguished by the death of a person. 
41. Provisions in case of insolvency.—(1) Where it is provided by a term in a contract to which an 
insolvent is a party that any dispute arising there out or in connection therewith shall be submitted to 
arbitration, the said term shall, if the receiver adopts the contract, be enforceable by or against him so far 
as it relates to any such dispute. 
(2) Where a person who has been adjudged an insolvent had, before the commencement of the 
insolvency proceedings, become a party to an arbitration agreement, and any matter to which the 
agreement applies is required to be determined in connection with, or for the purposes of, the insolvency 
proceedings, then, if the case is one to which sub-section (1) does not apply, any other party or the 
receiver may apply to the judicial authority having jurisdiction in the insolvency proceedings for an order 
directing that the matter in question shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the arbitration 
agreement, and the judicial authority may, if it is of opinion that, having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case, the matter ought to be determined by arbitration, make an order accordingly. 
(3) In this section the expression “receiver” includes an Official Assignee. 
42. Jurisdiction.—Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for 
the time being in force, where with respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this Part has 
been made in a Court, that Court alone shall have jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all 
subsequent applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral proceedings shall be made in that 
Court and in no other Court. 
1[42A. Confidentiality of information.—Notwithstanding anything contained by any other law for 
the time being in force, the arbitrator, the arbitral institution and the parties to the arbitration agreement 
shall maintain confidentially of all arbitral proceedings except award where its disclosure is necessary for 
the purpose of implementation and enforcement of award. 
42B. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the arbitrator for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder.] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 9 (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 

26 
 
43. Limitations.—(1) The Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall apply to arbitrations as it applies 
to proceedings in court. 
(2) For the purposes of this section and the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), an arbitration shall be 
deemed to have commenced on the date referred to in section 21. 
(3) Where an arbitration agreement to submit future disputes to arbitration provides that any claim to 
which the agreement applies shall be barred unless some step to commence arbitral proceedings is taken 
within a time fixed by the agreement, and a dispute arises to which the agreement applies, the Court, if it 
is of opinion that in the circumstances of the case undue hardship would otherwise be caused, and 
notwithstanding that the time so fixed has expired, may on such terms, if any, as the justice of the case 
may require, extend the time for such period as it thinks proper. 
(4) Where the Court orders that an arbitral award be set aside, the period between the commencement 
of the arbitration and the date of the order of the Court shall be excluded in computing the time prescribed 
by the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), for the commencement of the proceedings (including 
arbitration) with respect to the dispute so submitted. 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
 
Bihar.— 
Omission of sub-section (3) of Section-43 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.—Sub. 
by Section-3 of the Section 43 of the said Act shall be omitted. 
[Vide Bihar Act 20 of 2002, s. 2] 
1[PART IA 
ARBITRATION COUNCIL OF INDIA 
43A. Definitions. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Arbitration Council of India appointed under 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 43C; 
(b) “Council” means the Arbitration Council of India established under section 43B; 
(c) “Member” means a Member of the Council and includes the Chairperson. 
43B. Establishment and incorporation of Arbitration Council of India.—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish, for the purposes of this Act, a Council 
to be known as the Arbitration Council of India to perform the duties and discharge the functions under 
this Act. 
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to enter into contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi. 
(4) The Council may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other 
places in India. 
43C. Composition of Council.–– (1) The Council shall consist of the following Members, namely:–– 
(a) a person, who has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or, Chief Justice of a High Court or, a 
Judge of a High Court or an eminent person, having special knowledge and experience in the conduct 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 10 (w.e.f. 12-10-2023). 

27 
 
or administration of arbitration, to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India–Chairperson; 
(b) an eminent arbitration practitioner having substantial knowledge and experience in 
institutional arbitration, both domestic and international, to be nominated by the Central 
Government–Member; 
(c) an eminent academician having experience in research and teaching in the field of arbitration 
and alternative dispute resolution laws, to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Chairperson–Member; 
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and 
Justice or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary–Member, ex officio; 
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
or his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary– Member, ex officio; 
(f) one representative of a recognised body of commerce and industry, chosen on rotational basis 
by the Central Government–Part-time Member; and 
(g) Chief Executive Officer-Member-Secretary, ex officio. 
(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Council, other than ex officio Members, shall hold office as 
such, for a term of three years from the date on which they enter upon their office: 
Provided that no Chairperson or Member, other than ex officio Member, shall hold office as such after 
he has attained the age of seventy years in the case of Chairperson and sixty-seven years in the case of 
Member. 
(3) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and Members referred 
to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(4) The Part-time Member shall be entitled to such travelling and other allowances as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
43D. Duties and functions of Council.––(1) It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such 
measures as may be necessary to promote and encourage arbitration, mediation, conciliation or other 
alternative dispute resolution mechanism and for that purpose to frame policy and guidelines for the 
establishment, operation and maintenance of uniform professional standards in respect of all matters 
relating to arbitration.  
(2) For the purposes of performing the duties and discharging the functions under this Act, the 
Council may— 
(a) frame policies governing the grading of arbitral institutions; 
(b) recognise professional institutes providing accreditation of arbitrators; 
(c) review the grading of arbitral institutions and arbitrators; 
(d) hold training, workshops and courses in the area of arbitration in collaboration of law firms, 
law universities and arbitral institutes; 
(e) frame, review and update norms to ensure satisfactory level of arbitration and conciliation; 
(f) act as a forum for exchange of views and techniques to be adopted for creating a platform to 
make India a robust centre for domestic and international arbitration and conciliation; 
(g) make recommendations to the Central Government on various measures to be adopted to 
make provision for easy resolution of commercial disputes; 
(h) promote institutional arbitration by strengthening arbitral institutions; 

28 
 
(i) conduct examination and training on various subjects relating to arbitration and conciliation 
and award certificates thereof; 
(j) establish and maintain depository of arbitral awards made in India; 
(k) make recommendations regarding personnel, training and infrastructure of arbitral institutions; 
and 
(l) such other functions as may be decided by the Central Government. 
43E. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council.—No act or proceeding of the 
Council shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy or any defect, in the constitution of the Council; 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Council; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case. 
43F. Resignation of Members.—The Chairperson or the Full-time or Part-time Member may, by 
notice in writing, under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office: 
Provided that the Chairperson or the Full-time Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central 
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from 
the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office 
or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier. 
43G. Removal of Member.––(1) The Central Government may, remove a Member from his office if 
he––  
(a) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(b) has engaged at any time (except Part-time Member), during his term of office, in any paid 
employment; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no Member shall be removed from his 
office on the grounds specified in clauses (d) and (e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court, on a 
reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held by it in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that 
the Member, ought on such ground or grounds to be removed. 
43H. Appointment of experts and constitution of Committees thereof.––The Council may, 
appoint such experts and constitute such Committees of experts as it may consider necessary to discharge 
its functions on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations. 
43-I. General norms for grading of arbitral institutions.––The Council shall make grading of 
arbitral institutions on the basis of criteria relating to infrastructure, quality and calibre of arbitrators, 
performance and compliance of time limits for disposal of domestic or international commercial 
arbitrations, in such manner as may be specified by the regulations. 

29 
 
1[43J. Norms for accreditation of arbitrators.—The qualifications, experience and norms for 
accreditation of arbitrators shall be such as may be specified by the regulations.] 
43K. Depository of awards.––The Council shall maintain an electronic depository of arbitral awards 
made in India and such other records related thereto in such manner as may be specified by the 
regulations. 
43L. Power to make regulations by Council.––The Council may, in consultation with the Central 
Government, make regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
for the discharge of its functions and perform its duties under this Act. 
43M. Chief Executive Officer.––(1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Council, who 
shall be responsible for day-to-day administration of the Council. 
(2) The qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of the service of the Chief 
Executive Officer shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall discharge such functions and perform such duties as may be 
specified by the regulations. 
(4) There shall be a Secretariat to the Council consisting of such number of officers and employees as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(5) The qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of the service of the employees 
and other officers of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.] 
 
PART II 
ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS 
CHAPTER I 
New York Convention Awards 
44. Definition.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “foreign award” means an 
arbitral award on differences between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or 
not, considered as commercial under the law in force in India, made on or after the 11th day of October, 
1960— 
(a) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to which the Convention set forth in 
the First Schedule applies, and 
(b) in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions 
have been made may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be territories to which the said 
Convention applies. 
45. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), a judicial authority, when seized 
of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an agreement referred to in section 44, 
shall, at the request of one of the parties or any person claiming through or under him, refer the parties to 
arbitration, 2[unless it prima facie finds] that the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable 
of being performed. 
46. When foreign award binding.—Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this Chapter 
shall be treated as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and may 
accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall be construed as 
including references to relying on an award. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2021, s. 3, for section 43J (w.e.f. 4-11-2020). 
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 11, for “unless it finds” (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 

30 
 
47. Evidence.—(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of the 
application, produce before the court— 
 
 
(a) the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made; 
(b) the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified copy thereof; and 
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the award is a foreign award. 
(2) If the award or agreement to be produced under sub-section (1) is in a foreign language, the party 
seeking to enforce the award shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a diplomatic 
or consular agent of the country to which that party belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as 
may be sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
1[Explanation.—In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, “Court” means the High 
Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such High Court.] 
48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.—(1) Enforcement of a foreign award may be 
refused, at the request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court 
proof that— 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in section 44 were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award was 
made; or 
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment 
of the arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or 
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to 
arbitration: 
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not 
so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may 
be enforced; or 
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or 
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authority of the country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made. 
(2) Enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the Court finds that— 
(a) the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the 
law of India; or 
(b) the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India. 
2[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,— 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 21, for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
 

31 
 
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice. 
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.] 
(3) If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) the Court may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the 
decision on the enforcement of the award and may also, on the application of the party claiming 
enforcement of the award, order the other party to give suitable security. 
49. Enforcement of foreign awards.—Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award shall be deemed to be a decree of that Court. 
50. Appealable orders.—(1) 1[Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, an appeal] shall lie from the order refusing to— 
(a) refer the parties to arbitration under section 45; 
(b) enforce a foreign award under section 48, 
to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order. 
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court. 
51. Saving.—Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted. 
52. Chapter II not to apply.—Chapter II of this Part shall not apply in relation to foreign awards to 
which this Chapter applies. 
CHAPTER II 
Geneva Convention Awards 
53. Interpretation.—In this Chapter “foreign award” means an arbitral award on differences relating 
to matters considered as commercial under the law in force in India made after the 28th day of July,   
1924,— 
(a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which the Protocol set forth in the Second 
Schedule applies, and 
(b) between persons of whom one is subject to the jurisdiction of some one of such Powers as the 
Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been made, may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, declare to be parties to the Convention set forth in the Third Schedule, and of 
whom the other is subject to the jurisdiction of some other of the Powers aforesaid, and 
(c) in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions 
have been made, may, by like notification, declare to be territories to which the said Convention 
applies, 
and for the purposes of this Chapter an award shall not be deemed to be final if any proceedings for the 
purpose of contesting the validity of the award are pending in the country in which it was made. 
54. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), a judicial authority, on being 
seized of a dispute regarding a contract made between persons to whom section 53 applies and including 
an arbitration agreement, whether referring to present or future differences, which is valid under that 
section and capable of being carried into effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them 
or any person claiming through or under him to the decision of the arbitrators and such reference shall not 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 12, for “An appeal” (w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 

32 
 
prejudice the competence of the judicial authority in case the agreement or the arbitration cannot proceed 
or becomes inoperative. 
55. Foreign awards when binding.—Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this 
Chapter shall be treated as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and 
may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall be construed as 
including references to relying on an award. 
56. Evidence.—(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of 
application produce before the Court— 
(a) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made; 
(b) evidence proving that the award has become final; and 
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the conditions mentioned in clauses (a) and 
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 57 are satisfied. 
(2) Where any document requiring to be produced under sub-section (1) is in a foreign language, the 
party seeking to enforce the award shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a 
diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party belongs or certified as correct in such 
other manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
1[Explanation.—In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, “Court” means the High 
Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such High Court.] 
57. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.—(1) In order that a foreign award may be 
enforceable under this Chapter, it shall be necessary that— 
(a) the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under the 
law applicable thereto; 
(b) the subject-matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of India; 
(c) the award has been made by the arbitral tribunal provided for in the submission to arbitration 
or constituted in the manner agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law governing the 
arbitration procedure; 
(d) the award has become final in the country in which it has been made, in the sense that it will 
not be considered as such if it is open to opposition or appeal or if it is proved that any proceedings 
for the purpose of contesting the validity of the award are pending; 
(e) the enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy or the law of India. 
2[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,— 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or 
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice. 
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.] 
(2) Even if the conditions laid down in sub-section (1) are fulfilled, enforcement of the award shall be 
refused if the Court is satisfied that— 
(a) the award has been annulled in the country in which it was made; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 23, for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 
2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

33 
 
(b) the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to enable him to present his case; or that, being under a 
legal incapacity, he was not properly represented; 
(c) the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or that it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration: 
Provided that if the award has not covered all the differences submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, postpone such enforcement or grant it subject to such guarantee as the Court 
may decide. 
(3) If the party against whom the award has been made proves that under the law governing the 
arbitration procedure there is aground, other than the grounds referred to in clauses (a) and (c) of sub-
section (1) and clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2)entitling him to contest the validity of the award, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse enforcement of the award or adjourn the consideration thereof, 
giving such party a reasonable time within which to have the award annulled by the competent tribunal. 
58. Enforcement of foreign awards.—Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award shall be deemed to be a decree of the Court. 
59. Appealable orders.—(1) An appeal shall lie from the order refusing— 
(a) to refer the parties to arbitration under section 54; and 
(b) to enforce a foreign award under section 57, 
to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order. 
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court. 
60. Saving.—Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted. 
PART III 
CONCILIATION 
61. Application and scope.—(1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force 
and unless the parties have otherwise agreed, this Part shall apply to conciliation of disputes arising out of 
legal relationship, whether contractual or not and to all proceedings relating thereto. 
(2) This Part shall not apply where by virtue of any law for the time being in force certain disputes 
may not be submitted to conciliation. 
62. Commencement of conciliation proceedings.—(1) The party initiating conciliation shall send to 
the other party a written invitation to conciliate under this Part, briefly identifying the subject of the 
dispute. 
(2) Conciliation proceedings, shall commence when the other party accepts in writing the invitation to 
conciliate. 
(3) If the other party rejects the invitation, there will be no conciliation proceedings. 
(4) If the party initiating conciliation does not receive a reply within thirty days from the date on 
which he sends the invitation, or within such other period of time as specified in the invitation, he may 
elect to treat this as a rejection of the invitation to conciliate and if he so elects, he shall inform in writing 
the other party accordingly. 
63. Number of conciliators.—(1) There shall be one conciliator unless the parties agree that there 
shall be two or three conciliators. 
(2) Where there is more than one conciliator, they ought, as a general rule, to act jointly. 
64. Appointment of conciliators.—(1) Subject to sub-section (2)— 

34 
 
(a) in conciliation proceedings, with one conciliator, the parties may agree on the name of a sole 
conciliator; 
(b) in conciliation proceedings with two conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator; 
(c) in conciliation proceedings with three conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator and 
the parties may agree on the name of the third conciliator who shall act as the presiding conciliator. 
(2) Parties may enlist the assistance of a suitable institution or person in connection with the 
appointment of conciliators, and in particular,— 
(a) a party may request such an institution or person to recommend the names of suitable 
individuals to act as conciliator; or 
(b) the parties may agree that the appointment of one or more conciliators be made directly by 
such an institution or person: 
Provided that in recommending or appointing individuals to act as conciliator, the institution or 
person shall have regard to such considerations as are likely to secure the appointment of an independent 
and impartial conciliator and, with respect to a sole or third conciliator, shall take into account the 
advisability of appointing a conciliator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the parties. 
65. Submission of statements to conciliator.—(1) The conciliator, upon his appointment, may 
request each party to submit to him a brief written statement describing the general nature of the dispute 
and the points at issue. Each party shall send a copy of such statement to the other party. 
(2) The conciliator may request each party to submit to him a further written statement of his position 
and the facts and grounds in support thereof, supplemented by any documents and other evidence that 
such party deems appropriate. The party shall send a copy of such statement, documents and other 
evidence to the other party. 
(3) At any stage of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may request a party to submit to him 
such additional information as he deems appropriate. 
Explanation.—In this section and all the following sections of this Part, the term "conciliator" applies 
to a sole conciliator, two or three conciliators, as the case may be. 
66. Conciliator not bound by certain enactments.—The conciliator is not bound by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 
67. Role of conciliator.—(1) The conciliator shall assist the parties in an independent and impartial 
manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute. 
(2) The conciliator shall be guided by principles of objectivity, fairness and justice, giving 
consideration to, among other things, the rights and obligations of the parties, the usages of the trade 
concerned and the circumstances surrounding the dispute, including any previous business practices 
between the parties. 
(3) The conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such a manner as he considers 
appropriate, taking into account the circumstances of the case, the wishes the parties may express, 
including any request by a party that the conciliator hear oral statements, and the need for a speedy 
settlement of the dispute. 
(4) The conciliator may, at any stage of the conciliation proceedings, make proposals for a settlement 
of the dispute. Such proposals need not be in writing and need not be accompanied by a statement of the 
reasons therefor. 
68. Administrative assistance.—In order to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the 
parties, or the conciliator with the consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance by a 
suitable institution or person. 
69. Communication between conciliator and parties.—(1) The conciliator may invite the parties to 
meet him or may communicate with them orally or in writing. He may meet or communicate with the 
parties together or with each of them separately. 

35 
 
(2) Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where meetings with the conciliator are to be held, 
such place shall be determined by the conciliator, after consultation with the parties, having regard to the 
circumstances of the conciliation proceedings. 
70. Disclosure of information.—When the conciliator receives factual information concerning the 
dispute from a party, he shall disclose the substance of that information to the other party in order that the 
other party may have the opportunity to present any explanation which he considers appropriate: 
Provided that when a party gives any information to the conciliator subject to a specific condition that 
it be kept confidential, the conciliator shall not disclose that information to the other party. 
71. Co-operation of parties with conciliator.—The parties shall in good faith co-operate with the 
conciliator and, in particular, shall endeavour to comply with requests by the conciliator to submit written 
materials, provide evidence and attend meetings. 
72. Suggestions by parties for settlement of dispute.—Each party may, on his own initiative or at 
the invitation of the conciliator, submit to the conciliator suggestions for the settlement of the dispute. 
73. Settlement agreement.—(1) When it appears to the conciliator that there exist elements of a 
settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement 
and submit them to the parties for their observations. After receiving the observations of the parties, the 
conciliator may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such observations. 
(2) If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they may draw up and sign a written 
settlement agreement. If requested by the parties, the conciliator may draw up, or assist the parties in 
drawing up, the settlement agreement. 
(3) When the parties sign the settlement agreement, it shall be final and binding on the parties and 
persons claiming under them respectively. 
(4) The conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and furnish a copy thereof to each of 
the parties. 
74. Status and effect of settlement agreement.—The settlement agreement shall have the same 
status and effect as if it is an arbitral award on agreed terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by 
an arbitral tribunal under section 30. 
75. Confidentiality.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the conciliator and the parties shall keep confidential all matters relating to the conciliation 
proceedings. Confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement agreement, except where its disclosure is 
necessary for purposes of implementation and enforcement. 
76. Termination of conciliation proceedings.—The conciliation proceedings shall be terminated— 
(a) by the signing of the settlement agreement by the parties, on the date of the agreement; or 
(b) by a written declaration of the conciliator, after consultation with the parties, to the effect that 
further efforts at conciliation are no longer justified, on the date of the declaration; or 
(c) by a written declaration of the parties addressed to the conciliator to the effect that the 
conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration; or 
(d) by a written declaration of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if appointed, to the 
effect that the conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration. 
77. Resort to arbitral or judicial proceedings.—The parties shall not initiate, during the 
conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or judicial proceedings in respect of a dispute that is the     subject-
matter of the conciliation proceedings except that a party may initiate arbitral or judicial proceedings 
where, in his opinion, such proceedings are necessary for preserving his rights. 
78. Costs.—(1) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall fix the costs of 
the conciliation and give written notice thereof to the parties. 
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), “costs” means reasonable costs relating to— 

36 
 
(a) the fee and expenses of the conciliator and witnesses requested by the conciliator with the 
consent of the parties; 
(b) any expert advice requested by the conciliator with the consent of the parties; 
(c) any assistance provided pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 64 and section 68. 
(d) any other expenses incurred in connection with the conciliation proceedings and the 
settlement agreement. 
(3) The costs shall be borne equally by the parties unless the settlement agreement provides for a 
different apportionment. All other expenses incurred by a party shall be borne by that party. 
79. Deposits.—(1) The conciliator may direct each party to deposit an equal amount as an advance 
for the costs referred to in sub-section(2) of section 78 which he expects will be incurred. 
(2) During the course of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may direct supplementary 
deposits in an equal amount from each party. 
(3) If the required deposits under sub-sections (1) and (2) are not paid in full by both parties within 
thirty days, the conciliator may suspend the proceedings or may make a written declaration of termination 
of the proceedings to the parties, effective on the date of that declaration. 
(4) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits received and shall return any unexpended balance to the parties. 
80. Role of conciliator in other proceedings.—Unless otherwise agreed by the parties,— 
(a) the conciliator shall not act as an arbitrator or as a representative or counsel of a party in any 
arbitral or judicial proceeding in respect of a dispute that is the subject of the conciliation 
proceedings; 
(b) the conciliator shall not be presented by the parties as a witness in any arbitral or judicial 
proceedings. 
81. Admissibility of evidence in other proceedings.—The parties shall not rely on or introduce as 
evidence in arbitral or judicial proceedings, whether or not such proceedings relate to the dispute that is 
the subject of the conciliation proceedings,— 
(a) views expressed or suggestions made by the other party in respect of a possible settlement of 
the dispute; 
(b) admissions made by the other party in the course of the conciliation proceedings; 
(c) proposals made by the conciliator; 
(d) the fact that the other party had indicated his willingness  to accept a proposal for settlement 
made by the conciliator. 
PART IV 
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS 
82. Power of High Court to make rules.—The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act 
as to all proceedings before the Court under this Act. 
83. Removal of difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall made be after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
Houses of Parliament. 

37 
 
84. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after 
it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
85. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937 (6 of 1937), the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940) and the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement)                     
Act, 1961 (45 of 1961) are hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,— 
(a) the provisions of the said enactments shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which 
commenced before this Act came into force unless otherwise agreed by the parties but this Act shall 
apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which commenced on or after this Act comes into force; 
(b) all rules made and notifications published, under the said enactments shall, to the extent to 
which they are not repugnant to this Act, be deemed respectively to have been made or issued under 
this Act.  
86. Repeal and saving.—(1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Third) Ordinance, 1996 (Ord.27 of 
1996) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any order, rule, notification or scheme made or anything done or  
any action taken in pursuance of any provision of the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been 
made, done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
1[87. Effect of arbitral and related court proceedings commenced prior to 23rd October, 
2015.—Unless the parties otherwise agree, the amendments made to this Act by the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 shall— 
(a) not apply to— 
(i) arbitral proceedings commenced before the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015 (23rd October, 2015); 
(ii) court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such arbitral proceedings irrespective of 
whether such court proceedings are commenced prior to or after the commencement of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015; 
(b) apply only to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the commencement of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 and to court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such 
arbitral proceedings.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2019, s. 13 (r.w.e.f. 30-8-2019). 

38 
 
 
 

39 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 44) 
CONVENTION ON THE RECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS 
ARTICLE 1 
1. This Convention shall apply to the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in the 
territory of a State other than the State where the recognition and enforcement of such awards are sought, 
and arising out of differences between persons, whether physical or legal. It shall also apply to arbitral 
awards not considered as domestic awards in the State where their recognition and enforcement are 
sought. 
2. The term “arbitral awards” shall include not only awards made by arbitrators appointed for each 
case but also those made by permanent arbitral bodies to which the parties have submitted. 
3. When signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention, or notifying extension under article X 
hereof, any State may on the basis of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to the 
recognition and enforcement of awards made only in the territory of another Contracting State. It may 
also declare that it will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of legal relationships, 
whether contractual or not, which are considered as commercial under the national law of the State 
making such declaration. 
ARTICLE II 
1. Each Contracting State shall recognise an agreement in writing under which the parties undertake 
to submit to arbitration all or any differences which have arisen or which may arise between them in 
respect of defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not, concerning a subject-matter capable of 
settlement by arbitration. 
2. The term “agreement in writing” shall include an arbitral clause in a contract or an arbitration 
agreement, signed by the parties or contained in an exchange of letters or telegrams. 
3. The court of a Contracting State, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the 
parties have made an agreement within the meaning of this article, shall, at the request of one of the 
parties, refer the parties to arbitration, unless in finds that the said agreement is null and void, inoperative 
of incapable of being performed. 
ARTICLE III 
Each Contracting State shall recognize arbitral awards as binding and enforce them in accordance 
with the rules of procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon, under the conditions laid down 
in the following articles. There shall not be imposed substantially more onerous conditions or higher fees 
or charges on the recognition or enforcement of arbitral awards to which this Convention applies than are 
imposed on the recognition or enforcement of domestic arbitral awards. 
ARTICLE IV 
1. To obtain the recognition and enforcement mentioned in the preceding article, the party applying 
for recognition and enforcement shall, at the time of the application, supply— 
(a) the duly authenticated original award or a duly certified copy thereof; 
(b) the original agreement referred to in article II or a duly certified copy thereof. 
2. If the said award or agreement is not made in an official language of the country in which the 
award is relied upon, the party applying for recognition and enforcement of the award shall produce a 
translation of these documents into such language. The translation shall be certified by an official or 
sworn translator or by a diplomatic or consular agent. 
 
 

40 
 
ARTICLE V 
1. Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused, at the request of the party against 
whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the competent authority where the recognition and 
enforcement is sought, proof that— 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in article II were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award was 
made; or 
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment 
of the arbitrator or of the arbitration proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or 
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to 
arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from 
those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters submitted to 
arbitration may be recognised and enforced; or 
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or 
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authority of the country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made. 
2. Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the competent authority in 
the country where recognition and enforcement is sought finds that— 
(a) the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of 
that country; or 
(b) the recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of that 
country. 
ARTICLE VI 
If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in article V(1)(e), the authority before which the award is sought to be relied upon 
may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the decision on the enforcement of the award and may also, on the 
application of the party claiming enforcement of the award, order the other party to give suitable security. 
ARTICLE VII 
1. The provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the validity of multilateral or bilateral 
agreements concerning the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards entered into by the Contracting 
States nor deprive any interested party of any right the may have to avail himself of an arbitral award in 
the manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties of the country where such award is sought 
to be relied upon. 
2. The Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses of 1923 and the Geneva Convention on the Execution 
of Foreign Arbitral Awards of1927 shall cease to have effect between Contracting States on their 
becoming bound and to the extent that they become bound by this Convention. 
ARTICLE VIII 
1. This Convention shall be open until 31st December, 1958 for signature on behalf of any Member of 
the United Nations and also on behalf of any other State which is or hereafter becomes member of any 
specialised agency of the United Nations, or which is or hereafter becomes a party to the Statute of the 
International Court of Justice, or any other State to which an invitation has been addressed by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations. 
2. This Convention shall be ratified and the instrument of ratification shall be deposited with the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
ARTICLE 1X 
1. This Convention shall be open for accession to all States referred to in article VIII. 
2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations. 

41 
 
ARTICLE X 
1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare that this Convention shall 
extend to all or any of the territories for the international relations of which it is responsible. Such a 
declaration shall take effect when the Convention enters into force for the State concerned. 
2. At any time thereafter any such extension shall be made by notification addressed to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and shall take effect as from the ninetieth day after the day of receipt by the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations of this notification, or as from the date of entry into force of the 
Convention for the State concerned, whichever is the later. 
3. With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not extended at the time of signature, 
ratification or accession, each State concerned shall consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps 
in order to extend the application of this Convention to such territories, subject, where necessary for 
constitutional reasons, to the consent of the Governments of such territories. 
ARTICLE XI 
In the case of a federal or non-unitary State, the following provisions shall apply:— 
(a) with respect of those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdiction of 
the federal authority, the obligations of the federal Government shall to this extent be the same as 
those of Contracting States which are not federal States; 
(b) with respect to those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdiction of 
constituent States or provinces which are not, under the constitutional system of the federation, bound 
to take legislative action, the federal Government shall bring such articles with a favourable 
recommendation to the notice of the appropriate authorities of constituent States or provinces at the 
earliest possible moment; 
(c) a federal State Party to this Convention shall, at the request of any other Contracting State 
transmitted through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, supply a statement of the law and 
practice of the federation and its constituent units in regard to any particular provision of this 
Convention, showing the extent to which effect has been given to that provision by legislative or 
other action. 
ARTICLE XII 
1. This Convention shall come into force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the 
third instrument of ratification or accession. 
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to this Convention after the deposit of the third instrument of 
ratification or accession, this Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after deposit by such 
State of its instrument of ratification or accession. 
ARTICLE XIII 
1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by a written notification to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of receipt of the 
notification by the Secretary-General. 
2. Any State which has made a declaration or notification under article X may, at any time thereafter, 
by notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, declare that this Convention shall cease to 
extend to the territory concerned one year after the date of the receipt of the notification by the Secretary-
General. 
3. This Convention shall continue to be applicable to arbitral awards in respect of which recognition 
or enforcement proceedings have been instituted before the denunciation takes effect. 
ARTICLE XIV 
A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the present Convention against other 
Contracting States except to the extent that it is itself bound to apply the Convention. 
 
 

42 
 
ARTICLE XV 
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify the States contemplated in article VIII of the 
following:— 
(a) signatures and ratifications in accordance with article VIII; 
(b) accessions in accordance with article IX; 
(c) declarations and notifications under articles I, X and XI; 
(d) the date upon which this Convention enters into force in accordance with article XII; 
(e) denunciations and notifications in accordance with article XIII. 
ARTICLE XVI 
1. This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be 
equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations. 
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit a certified copy of this Convention to 
the States contemplated in article XIII. 
 
 

43 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 53) 
PROTOCOL ON ARBITRATION CLAUSES 
The undersigned, being duly authorised, declare that they accept, on behalf of the countries which 
they represent, the following provisions:— 
1. Each of the Contracting States recognises the validity of an agreement whether relating to existing 
or future differences between parties subject respectively to the jurisdiction of different Contracting States 
by which the parties to a contract agree to submit to arbitration all or any differences that may arise in 
connection with such contract relating to commercial matters or to any other matter capable of settlement 
by arbitration, whether or not the arbitration is to take place in a country to whose jurisdiction none of the 
parties is subject. 
Each Contracting State reserves the right to limit the obligation mentioned above to contracts which 
are considered as commercial under its national law. Any Contracting State which avails itself of this 
right will notify the Secretary-General of the League of Nations in order that the other Contracting States 
may be so informed. 
2. The arbitral procedure, including the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, shall be governed by the 
will of the parties and by the law of the country in whose territory the arbitration takes place. 
The Contracting States agree to facilitate all steps in the procedure which require to be taken in their 
own territories, in accordance with the provisions of their law governing arbitral procedure applicable to 
existing differences. 
3. Each Contracting State undertakes to ensure the execution by its authorities and in accordance with 
the provisions of its national laws of arbitral awards made in its own territory under the preceding articles. 
4. The Tribunals of the Contracting Parties, on being seized of a dispute regarding a contract made 
between persons to whom Article I applies and including an Arbitration Agreement whether referring to 
present or future differences which is valid in virtue of the said article and capable of being carried into 
effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them to the decision of the Arbitrators. 
Such reference shall not prejudice the competence of the judicial tribunals in case the agreement or 
the arbitration cannot proceed or becomes inoperative. 
5. The present Protocol, which shall remain open for signature by all States, shall be ratified. The 
ratification shall be deposited as soon as possible with the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, 
who shall notify such deposit to all the Signatory States. 
6. The present Protocol will come into force as soon as two ratifications have been deposited. 
Thereafter it will take effect, in the case of each Contracting State, one month after the notification by the 
Secretary-General of the deposit of its ratification. 
7. The present Protocol may be denounced by any Contracting State on giving one year's notice. 
Denunciation shall be effected by a notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the League, who 
will immediately transmit copies of such notification to all the other Signatory States and inform them of 
the date on which it was received. The denunciation shall take effect one year after the date on which it 
was notified to the Secretary-General, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying State. 
8. The Contracting States may declare that their acceptance of the present Protocol does not include 
any or all of the under mentioned territories: that is to say, their colonies, overseas possessions or 
territories, protectorates or the territories over which they exercise a mandate. 
The said States may subsequently adhere separately on behalf of any territory thus excluded. The 
Secretary-General of the League of Nations shall be informed as soon as possible of such adhesions. He 
shall notify such adhesions to all Signatory States. They will take effect one month after the notification 
by the Secretary-General to all Signatory States. 
The Contracting States may also denounce the Protocol separately on behalf of any of the territories 
referred to above. Article 7applies to such denunciation. 

44 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 53) 
CONVENTION ON THE EXECUTION OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS 
ARTICLE 1.—(1) In the territories of any High Contracting Party to which the present Convention 
applies, an arbitral award made in pursuance of an agreement whether relating to existing or future 
differences (hereinafter called “a submission to arbitration”) covered by the Protocol on Arbitration 
Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th,1923, shall be recognised as binding and shall be enforced 
in accordance with the rules of the procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon, provided that 
the said award has been made in a territory of one of the High Contracting Parties to which the present 
Convention applies and between persons who are subject to the jurisdiction of one of the High 
Contracting Parties. 
(2) To obtain such recognition or enforcement, it shall, further, be necessary:— 
(a) that the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under 
the law applicable thereto; 
(b) that the subject-matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of the 
country in which the award is sought to be relied upon; 
(c) that the award has been made by the Arbitral Tribunal provided for in the submission to 
arbitration or constituted in the manner agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law 
governing the arbitration procedure; 
(d) that the award has become final in the country in which it has been made, in the sense that it 
will not be considered as such if it is open to opposition, appeal or pourvoi en cassation (in the 
countries where such forms of procedure exist) or if it is proved that any proceedings for the purpose 
of contesting the validity of the award are pending; 
(e) that the recognition or enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy or to the 
principles of the law of the country in which it is sought to be relied upon. 
ARTICLE 2.—Even if the conditions laid down in Article 1 hereof are fulfilled, recognition and 
enforcement of the award shall be refused if the Court is satisfied:— 
(a) that the award has been annulled in the country in which it was made; 
(b) that the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to enable him to present his case; or that, being under a legal 
incapacity, he was not properly represented; 
(c) that the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or that it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration. 
If the award has not covered all the questions submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the competent 
authority of the country where recognition or enforcement of the award is sought can, if it thinks fit, 
postpone such recognition or enforcement or grant it subject to such guarantee as that authority may 
decide. 
ARTICLE 3.—If the party against whom the award has been made proves that, under the law 
governing the arbitration procedure, there is aground, other than the grounds referred to in Article 1(a) 
and (c), and Article 2(b) and (c), entitling him to contest the validity of the award in a Court of Law, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse recognition or enforcement of the award or adjourn the 
consideration thereof, giving such party a reasonable time within which to have the award annulled by the 
competent tribunal. 
 
 

45 
 
ARTICLE 4.—The party relying upon an award or claiming its enforcement must supply, in 
particular:— 
(1) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated, according to the requirements of the 
law of the country in which it was made; 
(2) documentary or other evidence to prove that the award has become final, in the sense defined 
in Article 1(d), in the country in which it was made; 
(3) when necessary, documentary or other evidence to prove that the conditions laid down in 
Article 1, paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) (a) and (c), have been fulfilled. 
A translation of the award and of the other documents mentioned in this Article into the official 
language of the country where the award is sought to be relied upon may be demanded. Such translations 
must be certified correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which the party who seeks to 
rely upon the award belongs or by a sworn translator of the country where the award is sought to be relied 
upon. 
ARTICLE 5.—The provisions of the above Articles shall not deprive any interested party of the right 
of availing himself of an arbitral award in the manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties 
of the country where such award is sought to be relied upon. 
ARTICLE 6.—The present Convention applies only to arbitral awards made after the coming into 
force of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923. 
ARTICLE 7.—The present Convention, which will remain open to the signature of all the signatories 
of the Protocol of 1923 on Arbitration Clauses, shall have been ratified. 
It may be ratified only on behalf of those Members of the League of Nations and Non-Member States 
on whose behalf the Protocol of 1923 shall have been ratified. 
Ratification shall be deposited as soon as possible with the Secretary-General of the League of 
Nations, who will notify such deposit to all the signatories. 
ARTICLE 8.—The present Convention shall come into force three months after it shall have been 
ratified on behalf of two High Contracting Parties. Thereafter, it shall take effect, in the case of each High 
Contracting Party, three months after the deposit of the ratification on its behalf with the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations. 
ARTICLE 9.—The present Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member of the League or 
Non-Member State. Denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Secretary-General of the League of 
Nations, who will immediately send a copy thereof, certified to be inconformity with the notifications, to 
all the other Contracting Parties, at the same time informing them of the date on which he received it. 
The denunciation shall come into force only in respect of the High Contracting Party which shall have 
notified it and one year after such notification shall have reached the Secretary-General of the League of 
Nations. 
The denunciation of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses shall entail, ipso facto, the denunciation of 
the present Convention. 
ARTICLE 10.—The present Convention does not apply to the colonies, protectorates or territories 
under suzerainty or mandate of any High Contracting Party unless they are specially mentioned. 
The application of this Convention to one or more of such colonies, protectorates or territories to 
which the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923, applies, can be 
effected at any time by means of a declaration addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of 
Nations by one of the High Contracting Parties. 
Such declaration shall take effect three months after the deposit thereof. 
The High Contracting Parties can at any time denounce the Convention for all or any of the colonies, 
protectorates or territories referred to above. Article 9 hereof applied to such denunciation. 
ARTICLE 11.—A certified copy of the present Convention shall be transmitted by the Secretary-
General of the League of Nations of every Member of the League of Nations and to every Non-Member 
State which signs the same. 

46 
 
1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 11(14)] 
 
 
Sum in dispute 
Model fee 
 
Up to Rs. 5,00,000 
Rs. 45,000 
 
Above Rs. 5,00,000 and up to Rs. 20,00,000 
Rs. 45,000 plus 3.5 per cent. of the claim amount 
over and above Rs. 5,00,000 
 
Above Rs. 20,00,000 and up to Rs. 1,00,00,000 
Rs. 97,500 plus 3 per cent. of the claim amount 
over and above Rs. 20,00,000 
 
Above Rs. 1,00,00,000 and up to  
Rs. 10,00,00,000 
Rs. 3,37,500 plus 1 per cent. of the claim amount 
over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000 
 
Above Rs. 10,00,00,000 and up to   
Rs. 20,00,00,000 
Rs. 12,37,500 plus 0.75 per cent. of the claim 
amount over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000 
 
Above Rs. 20,00,00,000 
Rs. 19,87,500 plus 0.5 per cent. of the claim 
amount over and above Rs. 20,00,00,000 with a 
ceiling of Rs. 30,00,000 
 
Note:—In the event, the arbitral tribunal is a sole arbitrator, he shall be entitled to an additional amount of 
twenty-five per cent. on the fee payable as per the table set out above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 25 (w.e.f. 23-10-2015). 

47 
 
 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 12(1)(b)] 
The following grounds give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of 
arbitrators: 
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel 
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present business 
relationship with a party. 
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one of the parties. 
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the parties. 
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration. 
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case without the 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself. 
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom. 
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case of companies 
with the persons in the management and controlling the company. 
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties. 
11.The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration. 
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar controlling 
influence in one of the parties. 
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the outcome of the case. 
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing party, and the 
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom. 
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute 
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the parties. 
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case. 
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute 
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an affiliate of one 
of the parties that is privately held. 
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the outcome of the 
dispute. 
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship with a third party 
who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the dispute. 
 
 

48 
 
Previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case 
20. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel for one of the parties or an affiliate 
of one of the parties or has previously advised or been consulted by the party or an affiliate of the party 
making the appointment in an unrelated matter, but the arbitrator and the party or the affiliate of the party 
have no ongoing relationship. 
21. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel against one of the parties or an 
affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter. 
22. The arbitrator has within the past three years been appointed as arbitrator on two or more 
occasions by one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
23. The arbitrator’s law firm has within the past three years acted for one of the parties or an affiliate 
of one of the parties in an unrelated matter without the involvement of the arbitrator. 
24. The arbitrator currently serves, or has served within the past three years, as arbitrator in another 
arbitration on a related issue involving one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
Relationship between an arbitrator and another arbitrator or counsel 
25. The arbitrator and another arbitrator are lawyers in the same law firm. 
26. The arbitrator was within the past three years a partner of, or otherwise affiliated with, another 
arbitrator or any of the counsel in the same arbitration. 
27. A lawyer in the arbitrator’s law firm is an arbitrator in another dispute involving the same party or 
parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
28. A close family member of the arbitrator is a partner or employee of the law firm representing one 
of the parties, but is not assisting with the dispute. 
29. The arbitrator has within the past three years received more than three appointments by the same 
counsel or the same law firm. 
Relationship between arbitrator and party and others involved in the arbitration 
30. The arbitrator’s law firm is currently acting adverse to one of the parties or an affiliate of one of 
the parties. 
31. The arbitrator had been associated within the past three years with a party or an affiliate of one of 
the parties in a professional capacity, such as a former employee or partner. 
Other circumstances 
32. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, which by reason of number or 
denomination constitute a material holding in one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties that is 
publicly listed. 
33. The arbitrator holds a position in an arbitration institution with appointing authority over the 
dispute. 
34. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties, where the affiliate is not directly involved in the matters in 
dispute in the arbitration. 
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child, parent or life 
partner. 
Explanation 2.—The term “affiliate” encompasses all companies in one group of companies including 
the parent company. 
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrators from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for parties frequently to appoint the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to be taken into account while applying the rules set out 
above. 

49 
 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 12(1)(b)] 
NAME: 
CONTACT DETAILS: 
PRIOR EXPERIENCE (INCLUDING EXPERIENCE WITH ARBITRATIONS): 
NUMBER OF ONGOING ARBITRATIONS: 
CIRCUMSTANCES 
DISCLOSING 
ANY 
PAST 
OR 
PRESENT 
RELATIONSHIP 
WITH 
ORINTEREST IN ANY OF THE PARTIES OR IN RELATION TO THE SUBJECT-MATTER 
INDISPUTE, WHETHER FINANCIAL, BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL OR OTHER KIND, WHICH IS 
LIKELY TO GIVE RISE TO JUSTIFIABLE DOUBTS AS TO YOURINDEPENDENCE OR 
IMPARTIALITY (LIST OUT): 
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE LIKELY TO AFFECT YOUR ABILITY TO DEVOTE 
SUFFICIENT TIME TO THE ARBITRATION AND IN PARTICULAR YOUR ABILITY TO FINISH 
THE ENTIRE ARBITRATION WITHIN TWELVE MONTHS (LIST OUT): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 12(5)] 
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel 
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present business 
relationship with a party. 
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one of the parties. 
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the parties. 
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration. 
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case without the 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself. 
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom. 
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case of companies 
with the persons in the management and controlling the company. 
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties. 
11. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration. 
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar controlling 
influence in one of the parties. 
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the outcome of the case. 
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing party, and the 
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom. 
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute 
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the parties. 
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case. 
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute 
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an affiliate of one 
of the parties that is privately held. 
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the outcome of the 
dispute. 
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship with a third party 
who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the dispute. 
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child, parent or life 
partner. 
Explanation 2.—The term “affiliate” encompasses all companies in one group of companies including 
the parent company. 
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrators from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for parties frequently to appoint the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to be taken into account while applying the rules set out 
above.] 
 

51 
 
[THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE.] Omitted by the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2021 (3 of 
2021), s. 4 (w.e.f. 4-11-2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 EXTRACTS FROM THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015 
(3 OF 2016) 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
1. Short title and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd October, 2015. 
*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
26. Act not to apply to pending arbitral proceedings.—Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 
the arbitral proceedings commenced, in accordance with the provisions of section 21 of the principal Act, 
before the commencement of this Act unless the parties otherwise agree but this Act shall apply in 
relation to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the date of commencement of this Act. 
27. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance,                   
2015 (Ord. 9 of 2015), is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 


================================================================================
  📄 Consumer Protection Act 2019.pdf
     Pages: 39
================================================================================
1 
 
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
Last Updated:17-9-2021 
____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS. 
3. Central Consumer Protection Council. 
4. Procedure for meetings of Central Council. 
5. Objects of Central Council. 
6. State Consumer Protection Councils. 
7. Objects of State Council. 
8. District Consumer Protection Council. 
9. Objects of District Council. 
CHAPTER III 
CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY 
10. Establishment of Central Consumer Protection Authority. 
11. Qualifications, method of recruitment, etc., of Chief Commissioner and Commissioners. 
12. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Authority. 
13. Appointment of officers, experts, professionals and other employees of Central Authority. 
14. Procedure of Central Authority. 
15. Investigation Wing. 
16. Power of District Collector. 
17. Complaints to authorities. 
18. Powers and functions of Central Authority. 
19. Power of Central Authority to refer matter for investigation or to other Regulator. 
20. Power of Central Authority to recall goods, etc. 
21. Power of Central Authority to issue directions and penalties against false or misleading 
advertisements. 
22. Search and seizure. 
23. Designation of any statutory authority or body to function as Central Authority. 
24. Appeal. 
25. Grants by Central Government. 
26. Accounts and audit. 
27. Furnishing of annual reports, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION 
28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
29. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of District Commission. 
 
 

2 
 
SECTIONS  
30. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of 
District Commission. 
31. Transitional provision. 
32. Vacancy in office of member of District Commission. 
33. Officers and other employees of District Commission. 
34. Jurisdiction of District Commission. 
35. Manner in which complaint shall be made. 
36. Proceedings before District Commission. 
37. Reference to mediation. 
38. Procedure on admission of complaint. 
39. Findings of District Commission. 
40. Review by District Commission in certain cases. 
41. Appeal against order of District Commission. 
42. Establishment of State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
43. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of State Commission. 
44. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of State 
Commission. 
45. Transitional provision. 
46. Officers and employees of State Commission. 
47. Jurisdiction of State Commission. 
48. Transfer of cases. 
49. Procedure applicable to State Commission. 
50. Review by State Commission in certain cases. 
51. Appeal to National Commission. 
52. Hearing of appeal. 
53. Establishment of National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
54. Composition of National Commission. 
55. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of National Commission. 
56. Transitional provision. 
57. Other officers and employees of National Commission. 
58. Jurisdiction of National Commission. 
59. Procedure applicable to National Commission. 
60. Review by National Commission in certain cases. 
61. Power to set aside ex parte orders. 
62. Transfer of cases. 
63. Vacancy in office of President of National Commission. 
64. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders. 
65. Service of notice, etc. 
66. Experts to assist National Commission or State Commission. 
67. Appeal against order of National Commission. 
68. Finality of orders. 
69. Limitation period. 
70. Administrative control. 
71. Enforcement of orders of District Commission, State Commission and National Commission. 
72. Penalty for non-compliance of order. 
73. Appeal against order passed under section 72. 

3 
 
CHAPTER V 
MEDIATION 
SECTIONS 
74. Establishment of consumer mediation cell. 
75. Empanelment of mediators. 
76. Nomination of mediators from panel. 
77. Duty of mediator to disclose certain facts. 
78. Replacement of mediator in certain cases. 
79. Procedure for mediation. 
80. Settlement through mediation. 
81. Recording settlement and passing of order. 
CHAPTER VI 
PRODUCT LIABILLITY 
82. Application of Chapter. 
83. Product liability action 
84. Liability of product manufacturer. 
85. Liability of product service provider. 
86. Liability of product sellers. 
87. Exceptions to product liability action. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
88. Penalty for non-compliance of direction of Central Authority. 
89. Punishment for false or misleading advertisement. 
90. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or storing, selling or distributing or importing products 
containing adulterant. 
91. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or for storing or selling or distributing or importing 
spurious goods. 
92. Cognizance of offence by court. 
93. Vexatious search. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
94. Measures to prevent unfair trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling, etc. 
95. Presidents, members, Chief Commissioner, Commissioner and certain officers to be public 
servants. 
96. Compounding of offences. 
97. Manner of crediting penalty. 
98. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
99. Power to give directions by Central Government. 
100. Act not in derogation of any other. 
101. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
102. Power of State Government to make rules. 
103. Power of National Commission to make regulations. 
104. Power of Central Authority to make regulations. 
105. Rules and regulations to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
106. Power to Remove Difficulties. 
107. Repeal and savings. 
 

4 
 
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019 
ACT NO. 35 OF 2019 
 
[9th August, 2019.] 
An Act to provide for protection of the interests of consumers and for the said purpose, to establish 
authorities for timely and effective administration and settlement of consumers' disputes and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.—(1) This Act may be called the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir*. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different States and for different provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of that provision. 
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the Central Government, by notification, this Act shall 
apply to all goods and services. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(1) “advertisement” means any audio or visual publicity, representation, endorsement or 
pronouncement made by means of light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic media, internet or 
website and includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper, invoice or such other documents; 
(2) “appropriate laboratory” means a laboratory or an organisation— 
(i) recognised by the Central Government; or 
(ii) recognised by a State Government, subject to such guidelines as may be issued by the 
Central Government in this behalf; or 
(iii) established by or under any law for the time being in force, which is maintained, 
financed or aided by the Central Government or a State Government for carrying out analysis or 
test of any goods with a view to determining whether such goods suffer from any defect; 
(3) “branch office” means— 
(i) any office or place of work described as a branch by the establishment; or 
(ii) any establishment carrying on either the same or substantially the same activity carried on 
by the head office of the establishment; 
                                                           
*. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh 
1. 20th July, 2020.—S. 2 [Except clauses (4), (13), (14), (16), (40)], s. 3 to 9 (both inclusive), s. 28 to 73 (both inclusive) [Except 
sub-clause (iv) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58], s. 74 to 81 (both inclusive), s. 82 to 87 (both inclusive), s. 90 and 
91 [Except sections 88, 89, 92 and 93], s. 95, 98,100 and 101 [Except clauses (f) to (m) and clauses (zg), (zh) and (zi) of sub-
section 2], s. 102, 103, 105, 106, 107 [Except sections 94, 96, 97, 99, 104], vide notification No. S.O. 2351(E),                  dated 
15th July, 2020, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
2. 24th July, 2020.-- S. 2 [clauses (4), (13), (14), (16), (40)], s. 10 to 27 (both inclusive), sub-clause (iv) of clause (a) of            
sub-section (1) of section  58, s. 88, 89, 92 and 93, 94, 96, 97 and 99, clause (f) to (m) of sub-section 2 and clauses (zg), (zh) 
and (zi) of sub-section 2 of s. 101, 104, vide notification No. S.O. 2421(E), dated 23rd July 2020, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
 

5 
 
(4) “Central Authority” means the Central Consumer Protection Authority established under 
section 10; 
(5) “complainant” means— 
(i) a consumer; or  
(ii) any voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the time being in force; or 
(iii) the Central Government or any State Government; or 
 (iv) the Central Authority; or 
(v) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the same interest; or 
(vi) in case of death of a consumer, his legal heir or legal representative; or 
(vii) in case of a consumer being a minor, his parent or legal guardian; 
(6) “complaint” means any allegation in writing, made by a complainant for obtaining any relief 
provided by or under this Act, that— 
(i) an unfair contract or unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice has been adopted 
by any trader or service provider; 
(ii) the goods bought by him or agreed to be bought by him suffer from one or more defects; 
(iii) the services hired or availed of or agreed to be hired or availed of by him suffer from any 
deficiency; 
(iv) a trader or a service provider, as the case may be, has charged for the goods or for the 
services mentioned in the complaint, a price in excess of the price— 
(a) fixed by or under any law for the time being in force; or 
(b) displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods; or 
(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by or under any law for the time being in 
force; or 
(d) agreed between the parties; 
(v) the goods, which are hazardous to life and safety when used, are being offered for sale to 
the public-- 
(a) in contravention of standards relating to safety of such goods as required to be 
complied with, by or under any law for the time being in force; 
(b) where the trader knows that the goods so offered are unsafe to the public; 
(vi) the services which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to life and safety of the public 
when used, are being offered by a person who provides any service and who knows it to be 
injurious to life and safety; 
(vii) a claim for product liability action lies against the product manufacturer, product seller 
or product service provider, as the case may be; 
(7) “consumer” means any person who— 
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and 
partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such 
goods other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly 
paid or partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such use is made 
with the approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for 
resale or for any commercial purpose; or 
(ii) hires or avails of any service for a consideration which has been paid or promised or 
partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any 

6 
 
beneficiary of such service other than the person who hires or avails of the services for 
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of 
deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned 
person, but does not include a person who avails of such service for any commercial purpose. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, — 
(a) the expression “commercial purpose” does not include use by a person of goods 
bought and used by him exclusively for the purpose of earning his livelihood, by means 
of self-employment; 
(b) the expressions “buys any goods” and “hires or avails any services” includes 
offline or online transactions through electronic means or by teleshopping or direct 
selling or multi-level marketing; 
(8) “consumer dispute” means a dispute where the person against whom a complaint has been 
made, denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint; 
(9) “consumer rights” includes,-- 
(i) the right to be protected against the marketing of goods, products or services which are 
hazardous to life and property; 
(ii) the right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity, standard and price of 
goods, products or services, as the case may be, so as to protect the consumer against unfair trade 
practices; 
(iii) the right to be assured, wherever possible, access to a variety of goods, products or 
services at competitive prices; 
(iv) the right to be heard and to be assured that consumer's interests will receive due 
consideration at appropriate fora; 
(v) the right to seek redressal against unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practices or 
unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and 
(vi) the right to consumer awareness; 
(10) “defect” means any fault, imperfection or shortcoming in the quality, quantity, potency, 
purity or standard which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being in force 
or under any contract, express or implied or as is claimed by the trader in any manner whatsoever in 
relation to any goods or product and the expression “defective” shall be construed accordingly; 
(11) “deficiency” means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature 
and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being 
in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in 
relation to any service and includes— 
(i) any act of negligence or omission or commission by such person which causes loss or 
injury to the consumer; and 
(ii) deliberate withholding of relevant information by such person to the consumer; 
(12) “design”, in relation to a product, means the intended or known physical and material 
characteristics of such product and includes any intended or known formulation or content of such 
product and the usual result of the intended manufacturing or other process used to produce such 
product; 
(13) “direct selling” means marketing, distribution and sale of goods or provision of services 
through a network of sellers, other than through a permanent retail location; 
(14) “Director-General” means the Director-General appointed under sub-section (2) of section 
15; 

7 
 
(15) “District Commission” means a District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under sub-section (1) of section 28; 
(16) “e-commerce” means buying or selling of goods or services including digital products over 
digital or electronic network; 
(17) “electronic service provider” means a person who provides technologies or processes to 
enable a product seller to engage in advertising or selling goods or services to a consumer and 
includes any online market place or online auction sites; 
(18) “endorsement”, in relation to an advertisement, means— 
(i) any message, verbal statement, demonstration; or 
(ii) depiction of the name, signature, likeness or other identifiable personal characteristics of 
an individual; or 
(iii) depiction of the name or seal of any institution or organisation, which makes the 
consumer to believe that it reflects the opinion, finding or experience of the person making such 
endorsement; 
(19) “establishment” includes an advertising agency, commission agent, manufacturing, trading 
or any other commercial agency which carries on any business, trade or profession or any work in 
connection with or incidental or ancillary to any commercial activity, trade or profession, or such 
other class or classes of persons including public utility entities in the manner as may be prescribed; 
(20) “express warranty” means any material statement, affirmation of fact, promise or description 
relating to a product or service warranting that it conforms to such material statement, affirmation, 
promise or description and includes any sample or model of a product warranting that the whole of 
such product conforms to such sample or model; 
(21) “goods” means every kind of movable property and includes “food” as defined in clause (j) 
of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006); 
(22) “harm”, in relation to a product liability, includes— 
(i) damage to any property, other than the product itself; 
(ii) personal injury, illness or death; 
(iii) mental agony or emotional distress attendant to personal injury or illness or damage to 
property; or 
(iv) any loss of consortium or services or other loss resulting from a harm referred to in sub-
clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii), but shall not include any harm caused to a product 
itself or any damage to the property on account of breach of warranty conditions or any 
commercial or economic loss, including any direct, incidental or consequential loss relating 
thereto; 
(23) “injury” means any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind or property; 
(24) “manufacturer” means a person who— 
(i) makes any goods or parts thereof; or 
(ii) assembles any goods or parts thereof made by others; or 
(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made by any other person; 
(25) “mediation” means the process by which a mediator mediates the consumer disputes; 
(26) “mediator” means a mediator referred to in section 75; 
(27) “member” includes the President and a member of the National Commission or a State 
Commission or a District Commission, as the case may be; 

8 
 
(28) “misleading advertisement” in relation to any product or service, means an advertisement, 
which— 
(i) falsely describes such product or service; or 
(ii) gives a false guarantee to, or is likely to mislead the consumers as to the nature, 
substance, quantity or quality of such product or service; or 
(iii) conveys an express or implied representation which, if made by the manufacturer or 
seller or service provider thereof, would constitute an unfair trade practice; or 
(iv) deliberately conceals important information; 
(29) “National Commission” means the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under sub-section (1) of section 53; 
(30) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the term “notify” 
shall be construed accordingly; 
(31) “person” includes-- 
(i) an individual; 
(ii) a firm whether registered or not; 
(iii) a Hindu undivided family; 
(iv) a co-operative society; 
(v) an association of persons whether registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860) or not; 
(vi) any corporation, company or a body of individuals whether incorporated or not; 
(vii) any artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses; 
(32) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government, or, as the case 
may be, the State Government; 
(33) “product” means any article or goods or substance or raw material or any extended cycle of 
such product, which may be in gaseous, liquid, or solid state possessing intrinsic value which is 
capable of delivery either as wholly assembled or as a component part and is produced for 
introduction to trade or commerce, but does not include human tissues, blood, blood products and 
organs; 
(34) “product liability” means the responsibility of a product manufacturer or product seller, of 
any product or service, to compensate for any harm caused to a consumer by such defective product 
manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services relating thereto; 
(35) “product liability action” means a complaint filed by a person before a District Commission 
or State Commission or National Commission, as the case may be, for claiming compensation for the 
harm caused to him; 
(36) “product manufacturer” means a person who— 
(i) makes any product or parts thereof; or 
(ii) assembles parts thereof made by others; or 
(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any products made by any other person; or 
(iv) makes a product and sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares, packages, labels, markets, 
repairs, maintains such product or is otherwise involved in placing such product for commercial 
purpose; or 
(v) designs, produces, fabricates, constructs or re-manufactures any product before its sale; or 
(vi) being a product seller of a product, is also a manufacturer of such product; 

9 
 
(37) “product seller”, in relation to a product, means a person who, in the course of business, 
imports, sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares, packages, labels, markets, repairs, maintains, or 
otherwise is involved in placing such product for commercial purpose and includes-- 
(i) a manufacturer who is also a product seller; or 
(ii) a service provider, 
but does not include— 
(a) a seller of immovable property, unless such person is engaged in the sale of 
constructed house or in the construction of homes or flats; 
(b) a provider of professional services in any transaction in which, the sale or use of a 
product is only incidental thereto, but furnishing of opinion, skill or services being the 
essence of such transaction; 
(c) a person who— 
(I) acts only in a financial capacity with respect to the sale of the product; 
(II) is not a manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retailer, direct seller or an 
electronic service provider; 
(III) leases a product, without having a reasonable opportunity to inspect and 
discover defects in the product, under a lease arrangement in which the selection, 
possession, maintenance, and operation of the product are controlled by a person other 
than the lessor; 
(38) “product service provider”, in relation to a product, means a person who provides any 
service in respect of such product; 
(39) “regulations” means the regulations made by the National Commission, or as the case may 
be, the Central Authority; 
(40) “Regulator” means a body or any authority established under any other law for the time 
being in force; 
(41) “restrictive trade practice” means a trade practice which tends to bring about manipulation of 
price or its conditions of delivery or to affect flow of supplies in the market relating to goods or 
services in such a manner as to impose on the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions and shall 
include-- 
(i) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in supply of such goods or in providing 
the services which has led or is likely to lead to rise in the price; 
(ii) any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or avail of any goods or, as 
the case may be, services as condition precedent for buying, hiring or availing of other goods 
or services; 
(42) “service” means service of any description which is made available to potential users 
and includes, but not limited to, the provision of facilities in connection with banking, financing, 
insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, telecom, boarding or 
lodging or both, housing construction, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or 
other information, but does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a 
contract of personal service; 
(43) “spurious goods” means such goods which are falsely claimed to be genuine; 
(44) “State Commission” means a State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under sub-section (1) of section 42; 
(45) “trader”, in relation to any goods, means a person who sells or distributes any goods for 
sale and includes the manufacturer thereof, and where such goods are sold or distributed in 
package form, includes the packer thereof; 

10 
 
(46) “unfair contract” means a contract between a manufacturer or trader or service provider 
on one hand, and a consumer on the other, having such terms which cause significant change in 
the rights of such consumer, including the following, namely:-- 
(i) requiring manifestly excessive security deposits to be given by a consumer for the 
performance of contractual obligations; or 
(ii) imposing any penalty on the consumer, for the breach of contract thereof which is 
wholly disproportionate to the loss occurred due to such breach to the other party to the 
contract; or 
(iii) refusing to accept early repayment of debts on payment of applicable penalty; or 
(iv) entitling a party to the contract to terminate such contract unilaterally, without 
reasonable cause; or 
(v) permitting or has the effect of permitting one party to assign the contract to the 
detriment of the other party who is a consumer, without his consent; or 
(vi) imposing on the consumer any unreasonable charge, obligation or condition which 
puts such consumer to disadvantage; 
(47) “unfair trade practice” means a trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, 
use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or 
deceptive practice including any of the following practices, namely:— 
(i) making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by visible representation including 
by means of electronic record, which— 
(a) falsely represents that the goods are of a particular standard, quality, quantity, grade, 
composition, style or model; 
(b) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard, quality or grade; 
(c) falsely represents any re-built, second-hand, renovated, reconditioned or old goods as 
new goods; 
(d) represents that the goods or services have sponsorship, approval, performance, 
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits which such goods or services do not have; 
(e) represents that the seller or the supplier has a sponsorship or approval or affiliation 
which such seller or supplier does not have; 
(f) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the need for, or the usefulness 
of, any goods or services; 
(g) gives to the public any warranty or guarantee of the performance, efficacy or length of 
life of a product or of any goods that is not based on an adequate or proper test thereof: 
Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that such warranty or guarantee is 
based on adequate or proper test, the burden of proof of such defence shall lie on the person 
raising such defence; 
(h) makes to the public a representation in a form that purports to be— 
(A) a warranty or guarantee of a product or of any goods or services; or 
(B) a promise to replace, maintain or repair an article or any part thereof or to repeat 
or continue a service until it has achieved a specified result, if such purported warranty or 
guarantee or promise is materially misleading or if there is no reasonable prospect that 
such warranty, guarantee or promise will be carried out; 
(i) materially misleads the public concerning the price at which a product or like products or 
goods or services, have been or are, ordinarily sold or provided, and, for this purpose, a 
representation as to price shall be deemed to refer to the price at which the product or goods or 

11 
 
services has or have been sold by sellers or provided by suppliers generally in the relevant market 
unless it is clearly specified to be the price at which the product has been sold or services have 
been provided by the person by whom or on whose behalf the representation is made; 
(j) gives false or misleading facts disparaging the goods, services or trade of another person. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause, a statement that is,— 
(A) expressed on an article offered or displayed for sale, or on its wrapper or container; or 
(B) expressed on anything attached to, inserted in, or accompanying, an article offered or 
displayed for sale, or on anything on which the article is mounted for display or sale; or 
(C) contained in or on anything that is sold, sent, delivered, transmitted or in any other 
manner whatsoever made available to a member of the public, 
shall be deemed to be a statement made to the public by, and only by, the person who had 
caused the statement to be so expressed, made or contained; 
(ii) permitting the publication of any advertisement, whether in any newspaper or otherwise, 
including by way of electronic record, for the sale or supply at a bargain price of goods or 
services that are not intended to be offered for sale or supply at the bargain price, or for a period 
that is, and in quantities that are, reasonable, having regard to the nature of the market in which 
the business is carried on, the nature and size of business, and the nature of the advertisement. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause, “bargain price” means,— 
(A) a price that is stated in any advertisement to be a bargain price, by reference to an 
ordinary price or otherwise; or 
(B) a price that a person who reads, hears or sees the advertisement, would reasonably 
understand to be a bargain price having regard to the prices at which the product advertised or 
like products are ordinarily sold; 
(iii) permitting— 
(a) the offering of gifts, prizes or other items with the intention of not providing them as 
offered or creating impression that something is being given or offered free of charge when it 
is fully or partly covered by the amount charged, in the transaction as a whole; 
(b) the conduct of any contest, lottery, game of chance or skill, for the purpose of 
promoting, directly or indirectly, the sale, use or supply of any product or any business 
interest, except such contest, lottery, game of chance or skill as may be prescribed; 
(c) withholding from the participants of any scheme offering gifts, prizes or other items 
free of charge on its closure, the information about final results of the scheme. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause, the participants of a scheme shall be 
deemed to have been informed of the final results of the scheme where such results are within 
a reasonable time published, prominently in the same newspaper in which the scheme was 
originally advertised; 
(iv) permitting the sale or supply of goods intended to be used, or are of a kind likely to 
be used by consumers, knowing or having reason to believe that the goods do not comply 
with the standards prescribed by the competent authority relating to performance, 
composition, contents, design, constructions, finishing or packaging as are necessary to 
prevent or reduce the risk of injury to the person using the goods; 
(v) permitting the hoarding or destruction of goods, or refusal to sell the goods or to make 
them available for sale or to provide any service, if such hoarding or destruction or refusal 
raises or tends to raise or is intended to raise, the cost of those or other similar goods or 
services; 

12 
 
(vi) manufacturing of spurious goods or offering such goods for sale or adopting 
deceptive practices in the provision of services; 
(vii) not issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for the goods sold or services rendered in 
such manner as may be prescribed; 
(viii) refusing, after selling goods or rendering services, to take back or withdraw 
defective goods or to withdraw or discontinue deficient services and to refund the 
consideration thereof, if paid, within the period stipulated in the bill or cash memo or receipt 
or in the absence of such stipulation, within a period of thirty days; 
(ix) disclosing to other person any personal information given in confidence by the 
consumer unless such disclosure is made in accordance with the provisions of any law for the 
time being in force. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS 
3. Central Consumer Protection Council.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in that notification, the Central Consumer Protection 
Council to be known as the Central Council. 
(2) The Central Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Minister-in-charge of the Department of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government, 
who shall be the Chairperson; and 
(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed. 
4. Procedure for meetings of Central Council.—(1) The Central Council shall meet as and when 
necessary, but at least one meeting of the Council shall be held every year. 
(2) The Central Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be prescribed. 
5. Objects of Central Council.—The objects of the Central Council shall be to render advice on 
promotion and protection of the consumers' rights under this Act. 
6. State Consumer Protection Councils.—(1) Every State Government shall, by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a State Consumer Protection 
Council for such State to be known as the State Council. 
(2) The State Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) the Minister-in-charge of Consumer Affairs in the State Government who shall be the 
Chairperson; 
(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed; 
(c) such number of other official or non-official members, not exceeding ten, as may be 
nominated by the Central Government. 
(3) The State Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings shall be held 
every year. 
(4) The State Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business, as may be prescribed. 
7. Objects of State Council.—The objects of every State Council shall be to render advice on 
promotion and protection of consumer rights under this Act within the State. 
8. District Consumer Protection Council.—(1) The State Government shall, by notification, 
establish for every District with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a District 
Consumer Protection Council to be known as the District Council. 

13 
 
(2) The District Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever name called), who shall be the Chairperson; and 
(b) such number of other official and non-official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings shall be 
held every year. 
(4) The District Council shall meet at such time and place within the district as the Chairperson may 
think fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be prescribed. 
9. Objects of District Council.—The objects of every District Council shall be to render advice on 
promotion and protection of consumer rights under this Act within the district.  
CHAPTER III 
CENRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY 
10. Establishment of Central Consumer Protection Authority.—(1) The Central Government 
shall, by notification, establish with effect from such date as it may specify in that notification, a Central 
Consumer Protection Authority to be known as the Central Authority to regulate matters relating to 
violation of rights of consumers, unfair trade practices and false or misleading advertisements which are 
prejudicial to the interests of public and consumers and to promote, protect and enforce the rights of 
consumers as a class. 
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of a Chief Commissioner and such number of other 
Commissioners as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government to exercise the powers 
and discharge the functions under this Act. 
(3) The headquarters of the Central Authority shall be at such place in the National Capital Region of 
Delhi, and it shall have regional and other offices in any other place in India as the Central Government 
may decide. 
11. Qualifications, method of recruitment, etc., of Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.—
The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the qualifications for 
appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of the service of the Chief Commissioner and 
Commissioners of the Central Authority. 
12. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Authority.—No act or proceeding of 
the Central Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Authority; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chief Commissioner or as a 
Commissioner; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Central Authority not affecting the merits of the case. 
13. Appointment of officers, experts, professionals and other employees of Central Authority.—
(1) The Central Government shall provide the Central Authority such number of officers and other 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the Central Authority appointed under this Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The Central Authority may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by regulations, 
such number of experts and professionals of integrity and ability, who have special knowledge and 
experience in the areas of consumer rights and welfare, consumer policy, law, medicine, food safety, 

14 
 
health, engineering, product safety, commerce, economics, public affairs or administration, as it deems 
necessary to assist it in the discharge of its functions under this Act. 
14. Procedure of Central Authority. —(1) The Central Authority shall regulate the procedure for 
transaction of its business and allocation of its business amongst the Chief Commissioner and 
Commissioners as may be specified by regulations. 
(2) The Chief Commissioner shall have the powers of general superintendence, direction and control 
in respect of all administrative matters of the Central Authority: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may delegate such of his powers relating to administrative 
matters of the Central Authority, as he may think fit, to any Commissioner (including Commissioner of a 
regional office) or any other officer of the Central Authority. 
15. Investigation Wing.—(1) The Central Authority shall have an Investigation Wing headed by a 
Director-General for the purpose of conducting inquiry or investigation under this Act as may be directed 
by the Central Authority. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint a Director-General and such number of Additional 
Director-General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director, from amongst persons 
who have experience in investigation and possess such qualifications, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) Every Additional Director-General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant 
Director shall exercise his powers, and discharge his functions, subject to the general control, supervision 
and direction of the Director-General. 
(4) The Director-General may delegate all or any of his powers to the Additional Director-General or 
Director, Joint Director or Deputy Director or Assistant Director, as the case may be, while conducting 
inquiries or investigations under this Act. 
(5) The inquiries or the investigations made by the Director-General shall be submitted to the Central 
Authority in such form, in such manner and within such time, as may be specified by regulations. 
16.  Power of District Collector.—The District Collector (by whatever name called) may, on a 
complaint or on a reference made to him by the Central Authority or the Commissioner of a regional 
office, inquire into or investigate complaints regarding violation of rights of consumers as a class, on 
matters relating to violations of consumer rights, unfair trade practices and false or misleading 
advertisements, within his jurisdiction and submit his report to the Central Authority or to the 
Commissioner of a regional office, as the case may be. 
17. Complaints to authorities.—A complaint relating to violation of consumer rights or unfair trade 
practices or false or misleading advertisements which are prejudicial to the interests of consumers as a 
class, may be forwarded either in writing or in electronic mode, to any one of the authorities, namely, the 
District Collector or the Commissioner of regional office or the Central Authority. 
18. Powers and functions of Central Authority.—(1) The Central Authority shall— 
(a) protect, promote and enforce the rights of consumers as a class, and prevent violation of 
consumers rights under this Act; 
(b) prevent unfair trade practices and ensure that no person engages himself in unfair trade 
practices; 
(c) ensure that no false or misleading advertisement is made of any goods or services which 
contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder; 
(d) ensure that no person takes part in the publication of any advertisement which is false or 
misleading. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Central 
Authority may, for any of the purposes aforesaid,-- 

15 
 
(a) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made into violations of consumer rights or 
unfair trade practices, either suo motu or on a complaint received or on the directions from the Central 
Government; 
(b) file complaints before the District Commission, the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, under this Act; 
(c) intervene in any proceedings before the District Commission or the State Commission or the 
National Commission, as the case may be, in respect of any allegation of violation of consumer rights 
or unfair trade practices; 
(d) review the matters relating to, and the factors inhibiting enjoyment of, consumer rights, 
including safeguards provided for the protection of consumers under any other law for the time being 
in force and recommend appropriate remedial measures for their effective implementation; 
(e) recommend adoption of international covenants and best international practices on consumer 
rights to ensure effective enforcement of consumer rights; 
(f) undertake and promote research in the field of consumer rights; 
(g) spread and promote awareness on consumer rights; 
(h) encourage non-Governmental organisations and other institutions working in the field of 
consumer rights to co-operate and work with consumer protection agencies; 
(i) mandate the use of unique and universal goods identifiers in such goods, as may be necessary, 
to prevent unfair trade practices and to protect consumers' interest; 
(j) issue safety notices to alert consumers against dangerous or hazardous or unsafe goods or 
services; 
(k) advise the Ministries and Departments of the Central and State Governments on consumer 
welfare measures; 
(l) issue necessary guidelines to prevent unfair trade practices and protect consumers' interest.  
19. Power of Central Authority to refer matter for investigation or to other Regulator.—(1) The 
Central Authority may, after receiving any information or complaint or directions from the Central 
Government or of its own motion, conduct or cause to be conducted a preliminary inquiry as to whether 
there exists a prima facie case of violation of consumer rights or any unfair trade practice or any false or 
misleading advertisement, by any person, which is prejudicial to the public interest or to the interests of 
consumers and if it is satisfied that there exists a prima facie case, it shall cause investigation to be made 
by the Director-General or by the District Collector. 
(2) Where, after preliminary inquiry, the Central Authority is of the opinion that the matter is to be 
dealt with by a Regulator established under any other law for the time being in force, it may refer such 
matter to the concerned Regulator along with its report. 
(3) For the purposes of investigation under sub-section (1), the Central Authority, the Director 
General or the District Collector may call upon a person referred to in sub-section (1) and also direct him 
to produce any document or record in his possession. 
20. Power of Central Authority to recall goods, etc.—Where the Central Authority is satisfied on 
the basis of investigation that there is sufficient evidence to show violation of consumer rights or unfair 
trade practice by a person, it may pass such order as may be necessary, including— 
(a) recalling of goods or withdrawal of services which are dangerous, hazardous or unsafe; 
(b) reimbursement of the prices of goods or services so recalled to purchasers of such goods or 
services; and 
(c) discontinuation of practices which are unfair and prejudicial to consumers' interest: 
Provided that the Central Authority shall give the person an opportunity of being heard before passing 
an order under this section. 

16 
 
21. Power of Central Authority to issue directions and penalties against false or misleading 
advertisements.—(1) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after investigation that any advertisement 
is false or misleading and is prejudicial to the interest of any consumer or is in contravention of consumer 
rights, it may, by order, issue directions to the concerned trader or manufacturer or endorser or advertiser 
or publisher, as the case may be, to discontinue such advertisement or to modify the same in such manner 
and within such time as may be specified in that order. 
(2) Notwithstanding the order passed under sub-section (1), if the Central Authority is of the opinion 
that it is necessary to impose a penalty in respect of such false or misleading advertisement, by a 
manufacturer or an endorser, it may, by order, impose on manufacturer or endorser a penalty which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees: 
Provided that the Central Authority may, for every subsequent contravention by a manufacturer or 
endorser, impose a penalty, which may extend to fifty lakh rupees. 
(3) Notwithstanding any order under sub-sections (1) and (2), where the Central Authority deems it 
necessary, it may, by order, prohibit the endorser of a false or misleading advertisement from making 
endorsement of any product or service for a period which may extend to one year: 
Provided that the Central Authority may, for every subsequent contravention, prohibit such endorser 
from making endorsement in respect of any product or service for a period which may extend to three 
years. 
(4) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after investigation that any person is found to publish, or 
is a party to the publication of, a misleading advertisement, it may impose on such person a penalty which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
(5) No endorser shall be liable to a penalty under sub-sections (2) and (3) if he has exercised due 
diligence to verify the veracity of the claims made in the advertisement regarding the product or service 
being endorsed by him. 
(6) No person shall be liable to such penalty if he proves that he had published or arranged for the 
publication of such advertisement in the ordinary course of his business: 
Provided that no such defence shall be available to such person if he had previous knowledge of the 
order passed by the Central Authority for withdrawal or modification of such advertisement. 
(7) While determining the penalty under this section, regard shall be had to the following, namely: — 
(a) the population and the area impacted or affected by such offence; 
(b) the frequency and duration of such offence; 
(c) the vulnerability of the class of persons likely to be adversely affected by such offence; and 
(d) the gross revenue from the sales effected by virtue of such offence. 
(8) The Central Authority shall give the person an opportunity of being heard before an order under 
this section is passed. 
22. Search and seizure.—(1) For the purpose of conducting an investigation after preliminary 
inquiry under sub-section (1) of section 19, the Director-General or any other officer authorised by him in 
this behalf, or the District Collector, as the case may be, may, if he has any reason to believe that any 
person has violated any consumer rights or committed unfair trade practice or causes any false or 
misleading advertisement to be made, shall,-- 
(a) enter at any reasonable time into any such premises and search for any document or record or 
article or any other form of evidence and seize such document, record, article or such evidence; 
(b) make a note or an inventory of such record or article; or 
(c) require any person to produce any record, register or other document or article. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to search and seizure 
shall apply, as far as may be, for search and seizure under this Act. 

17 
 
(3) Every document, record or article seized under clause (a) of sub-section (1) or produced under 
clause (c) of that sub-section shall be returned to the person, from whom they were seized or who 
produced the same, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production, as the case 
may be, after copies thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that person, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, have been taken. 
(4) Where any article seized under sub-section (1) are subject to speedy or natural decay, the 
Director-General or such other officer may dispose of the article in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) In the case of articles other than the articles referred to in sub-section (4), provisions contained in 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38 shall mutatis mutandis apply in relation to analysis or tests. 
23. Designation of any statutory authority or body to function as Central Authority.—The 
Central Government may, if it considers necessary, by notification, designate any statutory authority or 
body to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Central Authority referred to in section 10. 
24. Appeal.—A person aggrieved by any order passed by the Central Authority under sections 20 and 
21 may file an appeal to the National Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt 
of such order. 
25. Grants by Central Government.—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Central Authority grants of such sums of money as that 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
26. Accounts and audit.—(1) The Central Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Central Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such 
audit shall be payable by the Central Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Central Authority shall have the same rights, privileges 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally 
has, in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Central Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Central Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
27. Furnishing of annual reports, etc.—(1) The Central Authority shall prepare once in every year, 
in such form, manner and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its 
activities during the previous year and such other reports and returns, as may be directed, and copies of 
such report and returns shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) A copy of the annual report received under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is received, before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSUMER DISPUTER REDRESSAL COMMISSION 
28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.—(1) The State 
Government shall, by notification, establish a District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be 
known as the District Commission, in each district of the State: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one District Commission 
in a district. 

18 
 
(2) Each District Commission shall consist of— 
(a) a President; and 
(b) not less than two and not more than such number of members as may be prescribed, in 
consultation with the Central Government. 
29. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of District Commission.—The Central 
Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the qualifications, method of recruitment, 
procedure for appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the 
District Commission. 
30. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of 
District Commission.—The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries 
and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President, and members of the District 
Commission. 
31. Transitional provision.—Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of 
the District Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such as 
President or, as the case may be, as member till the completion of his term for which he has been 
appointed. 
32. Vacancy in office of member of District Commission.—If, at any time, there is a vacancy in the 
office of the President or member of a District Commission, the State Government may, by notification, 
direct— 
(a) any other District Commission specified in that notification to exercise the jurisdiction in 
respect of that district also; or 
(b) the President or a member of any other District Commission specified in that notification to 
exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the President or member of that District 
Commission also. 
33. Officers and other employees of District Commission.—(1) The State Government shall 
provide the District Commission with such officers and other employees as may be required to assist the 
District Commission in the discharge of its functions. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the District Commission shall discharge their functions under 
the general superintendence of the President of the District Commission. 
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the District Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
34. Jurisdiction of District Commission.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
District Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or 
services paid as consideration does not exceed one crore rupees: 
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe such other 
value, as it deems fit. 
(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a District Commission within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction,— 
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on business or has a branch office or 
personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of the 
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or has a branch office, or personally 
works for gain, provided that in such case the permission of the District Commission is given; or 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or 

19 
 
(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain. 
(3) The District Commission shall ordinarily function in the district headquarters and may perform its 
functions at such other place in the district, as the State Government may, in consultation with the State 
Commission, notify in the Official Gazette from time to time. 
35. Manner in which complaint shall be made.—(1) A complaint, in relation to any goods sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided, may be filed 
with a District Commission by— 
(a) the consumer,— 
(i) to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or such service 
is provided or agreed to be provided; or 
(ii) who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods or service; 
(b) any recognised consumer association, whether the consumer to whom such goods are sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or such service is provided or agreed to be provided, or 
who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods or service, is a member of such association 
or not; 
(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the same interest, with 
the permission of the District Commission, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all consumers so 
interested; or 
(d) the Central Government, the Central Authority or the State Government, as the case may be: 
Provided that the complaint under this sub-section may be filed electronically in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised consumer association” means any 
voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the time being in force. 
(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied with such fee and payable in 
such manner, including electronic form, as may be prescribed. 
36. Proceedings before District Commission.—(1) Every proceeding before the District 
Commission shall be conducted by the President of that Commission and atleast one member thereof, 
sitting together: 
Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding till it is completed, 
the President and the other member shall continue the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard 
by the previous member. 
(2) On receipt of a complaint made under section 35, the District Commission may, by order, admit 
the complaint for being proceeded with or reject the same: 
Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this section unless an opportunity of being heard 
has been given to the complainant: 
Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided within twenty-one 
days from the date on which the complaint was filed. 
(3) Where the District Commission does not decide the issue of admissibility of the complaint within 
the period so specified, it shall be deemed to have been admitted. 
37.  Reference to mediation.—(1) At the first hearing of the complaint after its admission, or at any 
later stage, if it appears to the District Commission that there exists elements of a settlement which may 
be acceptable to the parties, except in such cases as may be prescribed, it may direct the parties to give in 
writing, within five days, consent to have their dispute settled by mediation in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter V. 

20 
 
(2) Where the parties agree for settlement by mediation and give their consent in writing, the District 
Commission shall, within five days of receipt of such consent, refer the matter for mediation, and in such 
case, the provisions of Chapter V, relating to mediation, shall apply. 
38. Procedure on admission of complaint.—(1) The District Commission shall, on admission of a 
complaint, or in respect of cases referred for mediation on failure of settlement by mediation, proceed 
with such complaint. 
(2) Where the complaint relates to any goods, the District Commission shall,— 
(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty-one days from the date of its admission 
to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint directing him to give his version of the case within a 
period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be granted by it; 
(b) if the opposite party on receipt of a complaint referred to him under clause (a) denies or 
disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action to represent his 
case within the time given by the District Commission, proceed to settle the consumer dispute in the 
manner specified in clauses (c) to (g); 
(c) if the complaint alleges a defect in the goods which cannot be determined without proper 
analysis or test of the goods, obtain a sample of the goods from the complainant, seal it and 
authenticate it in the manner as may be prescribed and refer the sample so sealed to the appropriate 
laboratory along with a direction that such laboratory to make an analysis or test, whichever may be 
necessary, with a view to finding out whether such goods suffer from any defect alleged in the 
complaint or from any other defect and to report its findings thereon to the District Commission 
within a period of forty-five days of the receipt of the reference or within such extended period as 
may be granted by it; 
(d) before any sample of the goods is referred to any appropriate laboratory under clause (c), 
require the complainant to deposit to the credit of the Commission such fees as may be specified, for 
payment to the appropriate laboratory for carrying out the necessary analysis or test in relation to the 
goods in question; 
(e) remit the amount deposited to its credit under clause (d) to the appropriate laboratory to enable 
it to carry out the analysis or test mentioned in clause (c) and on receipt of the report from the 
appropriate laboratory, it shall forward a copy of the report along with such remarks as it may feel 
appropriate to the opposite party; 
(f) if any of the parties disputes the correctness of the findings of the appropriate laboratory, or 
disputes the correctness of the methods of analysis or test adopted by the appropriate laboratory, 
require the opposite party or the complainant to submit in writing his objections with regard to the 
report made by the appropriate laboratory; 
(g) give a reasonable opportunity to the complainant as well as the opposite party of being heard 
as to the correctness or otherwise of the report made by the appropriate laboratory and also as to the 
objection made in relation thereto under clause (f) and issue an appropriate order under section 39. 
(3) The District Commission shall, if the complaint admitted by it under sub-section (2) of section 36 
relates to goods in respect of which the procedure specified in sub-section (2) cannot be followed, or if 
the complaint relates to any services,— 
(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite party directing him to give his version of the 
case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be 
granted by the District Commission; 
(b) if the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of the complaint, referred to him under clause (a) 
denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action to 
represent his case within the time given by the District Commission, it shall proceed to settle the 
consumer dispute— 
(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant and the opposite party, if 
the opposite party denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or 

21 
 
(ii) ex parte on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant, where the 
opposite party omits or fails to take any action to represent his case within the time given by the 
Commission; 
(c) decide the complaint on merits if the complainant fails to appear on the date of hearing. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3), the District Commission may, by order, require an 
electronic service provider to provide such information, documents or records, as may be specified in that 
order. 
(5) No proceedings complying with the procedure laid down in [sub-sections (2) and (3)] shall be 
called in question in any court on the ground that the principles of natural justice have not been complied 
with. 
(6) Every complaint shall be heard by the District Commission on the basis of affidavit and 
documentary evidence placed on record: 
Provided that where an application is made for hearing or for examination of parties in person or 
through video conferencing, the District Commission may, on sufficient cause being shown, and after 
recording its reasons in writing, allow the same. 
(7) Every complaint shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to 
decide the complaint within a period of three months from the date of receipt of notice by opposite party 
where the complaint does not require analysis or testing of commodities and within five months if it 
requires analysis or testing of commodities: 
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the District Commission unless sufficient 
cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by the 
Commission: 
Provided further that the District Commission shall make such orders as to the costs occasioned by 
the adjournment as may be specified by regulations: 
Provided also that in the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period so specified, the 
District Commission shall record in writing, the reasons for the same at the time of disposing of the said 
complaint. 
(8) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District Commission, if it appears 
necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case. 
(9) For the purposes of this section, the District Commission shall have the same powers as are vested 
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely:— 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any defendant or witness and examining the 
witness on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material object as evidence; 
(c) receiving of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the requisitioning of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the appropriate 
laboratory or from any other relevant source; 
(e) issuing of commissions for the examination of any witness, or document; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(10) Every proceeding before the District Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of section 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the District 
Commission shall be deemed to be a criminal court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
(11) Where the complainant is a consumer referred to in sub-clause (v) of clause (5) of section 2, the 
provisions of Order I Rule 8 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall 

22 
 
apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or decree shall be construed as a 
reference to a complaint or the order of the District Commission thereon. 
(12) In the event of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the opposite party against whom 
the complaint has been filed, the provisions of Order XXII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to the 
plaintiff and the defendant shall be construed as reference to a complainant or the opposite party, as the 
case may be. 
39. Findings of District Commission.—(1) Where the District Commission is satisfied that the 
goods complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the 
allegations contained in the complaint about the services or any unfair trade practices, or claims for 
compensation under product liability are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him 
to do one or more of the following, namely:— 
(a) to remove the defect pointed out by the appropriate laboratory from the goods in question; 
(b) to replace the goods with new goods of similar description which shall be free from any 
defect; 
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the charges paid by the 
complainant along with such interest on such price or charges as may be decided; 
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer for any loss or 
injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the opposite party: 
Provided that the District Commission shall have the power to grant punitive damages in such 
circumstances as it deems fit; 
(e) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation in a product liability action 
under Chapter VI; 
(f) to remove the defects in goods or deficiencies in the services in question; 
(g) to discontinue the unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practice and not to repeat them; 
(h) not to offer the hazardous or unsafe goods for sale; 
(i) to withdraw the hazardous goods from being offered for sale; 
(j) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services which are 
hazardous in nature; 
(k) to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or injury has been 
suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable conveniently: 
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than twenty-five per cent. 
of the value of such defective goods sold or service provided, as the case may be, to such consumers; 
(l) to issue corrective advertisement to neutralise the effect of misleading advertisement at the 
cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing such misleading advertisement; 
(m) to provide for adequate costs to parties; and 
(n) to cease and desist from issuing any misleading advertisement. 
(2) Any amount obtained under sub-section (1) shall be credited to such fund and utilised in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) In any proceeding conducted by the President and a member and if they differ on any point or 
points, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and refer the same to another member for 
hearing on such point or points and the opinion of the majority shall be the order of the District 
Commission: 
Provided that the other member shall give his opinion on such point or points referred to him within a 
period of one month from the date of such reference. 

23 
 
(4) Every order made by the District Commission under sub-section (1) shall be signed by the 
President and the member who conducted the proceeding: 
Provided that where the order is made as per majority opinion under sub-section (3), such order shall 
also be signed by the other member. 
40. Review by District Commission in certain cases.—The District Commission shall have the 
power to review any of the order passed by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either 
of its own motion or on an application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order. 
41. Appeal against order of District Commission.—Any person aggrieved by an order made by the 
District Commission may prefer an appeal against such order to the State Commission on the grounds of 
facts or law within a period of forty-five days from the date of the order, in such form and manner, as may 
be prescribed: 
Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty-five days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period: 
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of 
the District Commission, shall be entertained by the State Commission unless the appellant has deposited 
fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided also that no appeal shall lie from any order passed under sub-section (1) of section 81 by the 
District Commission pursuant to a settlement by mediation under section 80. 
42. Establishment of State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.—(1) The State 
Government shall, by notification, establish a State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be 
known as the State Commission, in the State. 
(2) The State Commission shall ordinarily function at the State capital and perform its functions at 
such other places as the State Government may in consultation with the State Commission notify in the 
Official Gazette: 
Provided that the State Government may, by notification, establish regional benches of the State 
Commission, at such places, as it deems fit. 
(3) Each State Commission shall consist of— 
(a) a President; and 
(b) not less than four or not more than such number of members as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Central Government. 
43. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of State Commission.—The Central 
Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the qualification for appointment, method of 
recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the President and 
members of the State Commission. 
44. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of 
State Commission.—The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries and 
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the State 
Commission. 
45. Transitional provision.—Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of 
the State Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such, as 
President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term. 
46. Officers and employees of State Commission.—(1) The State Government shall determine the 
nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the State Commission in the 
discharge of its functions and provide the Commission with such officers and other employees as it may 
think fit. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the State Commission shall discharge their functions under 
the general superintendence of the President. 

24 
 
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the State Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
47. Jurisdiction of State Commission.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State 
Commission shall have jurisdiction— 
(a) to entertain— 
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration, exceeds rupees 
one crore, but does not exceed rupees ten crore: 
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe 
such other value, as it deems fit; 
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or services paid as 
consideration does not exceed ten crore rupees; 
(iii) appeals against the orders of any District Commission within the State; and 
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any District Commission within the State, where it appears to the State 
Commission that such District Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has 
failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with 
material irregularity. 
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State Commission may be exercised by Benches 
thereof, and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members as the President may 
deem fit: 
Provided that the senior-most member shall preside over the Bench. 
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are equally divided, 
they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall 
either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more 
of the other members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of 
the members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it: 
Provided that the President or the other members, as the case may be, shall give opinion on the point 
or points so referred within a period of one month from the date of such reference. 
(4) A complaint shall be instituted in a State Commission within the limits of whose jurisdiction,-- 
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on business or has a branch office or 
personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of 
the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or has a branch office or 
personally works for gain, provided in such case, the permission of the State Commission is given; 
or 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or 
(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain. 
48. Transfer of cases.—On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending before a District 
Commission to another District Commission within the State if the interest of justice so requires. 
49. Procedure applicable to State Commission.—(1) The provisions relating to complaints under 
sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall, with such modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the 
disposal of complaints by the State Commission. 

25 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the State Commission may also declare any 
terms of contract, which is unfair to any consumer, to be null and void. 
50. Review by State Commission in certain cases.—The State Commission shall have the power to 
review any of the order passed by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own 
motion or on an application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order. 
51. Appeal to National Commission.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State 
Commission in exercise of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 
section 47 may prefer an appeal against such order to the National Commission within a period of thirty 
days from the date of the order in such form and manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the National Commission shall not entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of thirty days unless it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period: 
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of 
the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National Commission unless the appellant has 
deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act or by any other law for the time being in 
force, an appeal shall lie to the National Commission from any order passed in appeal by any State 
Commission, if the National Commission is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law. 
(3) In an appeal involving a question of law, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the 
substantial question of law involved in the appeal. 
(4) Where the National Commission is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any 
case, it shall formulate that question and hear the appeal on that question: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the 
National Commission to hear, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the appeal on any other substantial 
question of law, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question of law. 
(5) An appeal may lie to the National Commission under this section from an order passed ex parte 
by the State Commission. 
52. Hearing of appeal.—An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National Commission, 
as the case may be, shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and every endeavour shall be made to 
dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its admission: 
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of 
adjournment have been recorded in writing by such Commission: 
Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall 
make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment, as may be specified by regulations: 
Provided also that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period so specified, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record in writing the reasons for the 
same at the time of disposing of the said appeal. 
53. Establishment of National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification, establish a National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be 
known as the National Commission. 
(2) The National Commission shall ordinarily function at the National Capital Region and perform its 
functions at such other places as the Central Government may in consultation with the National 
Commission notify in the Official Gazette: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, establish regional Benches of the 
National Commission, at such places, as it deems fit. 
54. Composition of National Commission.—The National Commission shall consist of— 

26 
 
(a) a President; and 
(b) not less than four and not more than such number of members as may be prescribed. 
55. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of National Commission.—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for qualifications, appointment, term of office, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the President 
and members of the National Commission: 
Provided that the President and members of the National Commission shall hold office for such term 
as specified in the rules made by the Central Government but not exceeding five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided further that no President or members shall hold office as such after he has attained such age 
as specified in the rules made by the Central Government which shall not exceed,— 
(a) in the case of the President, the age of seventy years; 
(b) in the case of any other member, the age of sixty-seven years. 
1[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the qualifications, appointment, term of 
office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
President and other members of the National Commission appointed after the commencement of the 
Tribunal Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of the said Act.] 
(2) Neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of President and 
members of the National Commission shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
56. Transitional provision.—The President and every other member appointed immediately before 
the commencement of section 177 of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017) shall continue to be governed by 
the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) and the rules made there under as if 
this Act had not come into force. 
57. Other officers and employees of National Commission.—(1) The Central Government shall 
provide, in consultation with the President of the National Commission, such number of officers and other 
employees to assist the National Commission in the discharge of its functions as it may think fit. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the National Commission shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintendence of the President of the National Commission. 
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the National Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
58. Jurisdiction of National Commission.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
National Commission shall have jurisdiction— 
(a) to entertain— 
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration exceeds rupees 
ten crore: 
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe 
such other value, as it deems fit; 
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or services paid as 
consideration exceeds ten crore rupees; 
(iii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission; 
(iv) appeals against the orders of the Central Authority; and 
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any State Commission where it appears to the National Commission 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 30 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021). 

27 
 
that such State Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to 
exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with 
material irregularity. 
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the National Commission may be exercised by Benches 
thereof and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members as he may deem fit: 
Provided that the senior-most member of the Bench shall preside over the Bench. 
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are equally divided, 
they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall 
either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more 
of the other members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of 
the members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it: 
Provided that the President or the other member, as the case may be, shall give opinion on the point or 
points so referred within a period of two months from the date of such reference. 
59. Procedure applicable to National Commission.—(1) The provisions relating to complaints 
under sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall, with such modifications as may be considered necessary, be 
applicable to the disposal of complaints by the National Commission. 
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the National Commission may also declare any terms of 
contract, which is unfair to any consumer to be null and void. 
60. Review by National Commission in certain cases.—The National Commission shall have the 
power to review any of the order passed by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either 
of its own motion or on an application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order. 
61. Power to set aside ex parte orders.—Where an order is passed by the National Commission ex 
parte, the aggrieved party may make an application to the Commission for setting aside such order. 
62. Transfer of cases.—On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the National 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any complaint pending 
before the District Commission of one State to a District Commission of another State or before one State 
Commission to another State Commission. 
63. Vacancy in office of President of National Commission.—When the office of President of the 
National Commission is vacant or a person occupying such office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, 
unable to perform the duties of his office, these shall be performed by the senior-most member of the 
National Commission: 
Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court or a person who has been a Judicial Member is a 
member of the National Commission, such member or where the number of such members is more than 
one, the senior-most person amongst such members, shall preside over the National Commission in the 
absence of President of that Commission. 
64. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders.—No act or proceeding of the 
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission shall be invalid by reason only 
of the existence of any vacancy amongst its members or any defect in the constitution thereof. 
65. Service of notice, etc.—(1) All notices, required by this Act to be served, shall be served by 
delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered post acknowledgment due addressed to opposite 
party against whom complaint is made or to the complainant by speed post or by such courier service, 
approved by the District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case 
may be, or by any other mode of transmission of documents including electronic means. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the notice required by this Act 
may be served on an electronic service provider at the address provided by it on the electronic platform 
from where it provides its services as such and for this purpose, the electronic service provider shall 
designate a nodal officer to accept and process such notices. 

28 
 
(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the opposite party or his 
agent or, as the case may be, by the complainant is received by the District Commission, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, or postal article containing the notice is 
received back by such District Commission, State Commission or the National Commission, with an 
endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by the 
courier service to the effect that the opposite party or his agent or complainant had refused to take 
delivery of the postal article containing the notice or had refused to accept the notice by any other means 
specified in sub-section (1) when tendered or transmitted to him, the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall declare that the notice has been duly 
served on the opposite party or to the complainant, as the case may be: 
Provided that where the notice was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by registered post 
acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub-section shall be made notwithstanding the fact 
that the acknowledgment has been lost or misplaced, or for any other reason, has not been received by the 
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, within 
thirty days from the date of issue of notice. 
(4) All notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant, as the case may be, shall 
be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed in the case of the opposite party, to the place where 
business or profession is carried on, and in case of the complainant, the place where such person actually 
and voluntarily resides. 
66. Experts to assist National Commission or State Commission.—Where the National 
Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, on an application by a complainant or 
otherwise, is of the opinion that it involves the larger interest of consumers, it may direct any individual 
or organisation or expert to assist the National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be. 
67. Appeal against order of National Commission.—Any person, aggrieved by an order made by 
the National Commission in exercise of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of             
sub-section (1) of section 58, may prefer an appeal against such order to the Supreme Court within a 
period of thirty days from the date of the order: 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period: 
Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of 
the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme Court unless that person has deposited fifty 
per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be prescribed. 
68. Finality of orders.—Every order of a District Commission or the State Commission or the 
National Commission, as the case may be, shall, if no appeal has been preferred against such order under 
the provisions of this Act, be final. 
69. Limitation period.—(1) The District Commission, the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on which the 
cause of action has arisen. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a complaint may be entertained after the 
period specified in sub-section (1), if the complainant satisfies the District Commission, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, that he had sufficient cause for not filing 
the complaint within such period: 
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, records its reasons for condoning such 
delay. 
70. Administrative control.—(1) The National Commission shall have the authority to lay down 
such adequate standards in consultation with the Central Government from time to time, for better 
protection of the interests of consumers and for that purpose, shall have administrative control over all the 
State Commissions in the following matters, namely:— 

29 
 
(a) monitoring performance of the State Commissions in terms of their disposal by calling for 
periodical returns regarding the institution, disposal and pendency of cases; 
(b) investigating into any allegations against the President and members of a State Commission 
and submitting inquiry report to the State Government concerned along with copy endorsed to the 
Central Government for necessary action; 
(c) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of uniform procedure in the hearing of matters, 
prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the opposite parties, furnishing of 
english translation of judgments written in any language, speedy grant of copies of documents; 
(d) overseeing the functioning of the State Commission or the District Commission either by way 
of inspection or by any other means, as the National Commission may like to order from time to time, 
to ensure that the objects and purposes of the Act are best served and the standards set by the National 
Commission are implemented without interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom. 
(2) There shall be a monitoring cell to be constituted by the President of the National Commission to 
oversee the functioning of the State Commissions from the administrative point of view. 
(3) The State Commission shall have administrative control over all the District Commissions within 
its jurisdiction in all matters referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) The National Commission and the State Commissions shall furnish to the Central Government 
periodically or as and when required, any information including the pendency of cases in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) The State Commission shall furnish, periodically or as and when required to the State Government 
any information including pendency of cases in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
71. Enforcement of orders of District Commission, State Commission and National 
Commission.—Every order made by a District Commission, State Commission or the National 
Commission shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a Court in a suit 
before it and the provisions of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908) shall, as far as may be, applicable, subject to the modification that every reference therein to the 
decree shall be construed as reference to the order made under this Act. 
72. Penalty for non-compliance of order.—(1) Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the 
District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month, but which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees, but which may extend 
to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall have 
the power of a Judicial Magistrate of first class for the trial of offences under sub-section (1), and on 
conferment of such powers, the District Commission or the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a Judicial Magistrate of first class for the 
purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided, the offences under sub-section (1) shall be tried summarily by the 
District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be. 
73. Appeal against order passed under section 72.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), where an order is passed under sub-section (1) of section 
72, an appeal shall lie, both on facts and on law from— 
(a) the order made by the District Commission to the State Commission; 
(b) the order made by the State Commission to the National Commission; and 
(c) the order made by the National Commission to the Supreme Court. 

30 
 
(2) Except as provided in sub-section (1), no appeal shall lie before any court, from any order of a 
District Commission or a State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
order of a District Commission or a State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be: 
Provided that the State Commission or the National Commission or the Supreme Court, as the case 
may be, may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the said period of thirty days. 
CHAPTER V 
MEDIATION 
74. Establishment of consumer mediation cell.—(1) The State Government shall establish, by 
notification, a consumer mediation cell to be attached to each of the District Commissions and the State 
Commissions of that State. 
(2) The Central Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation cell to be attached 
to the National Commission and each of the regional Benches. 
(3) A consumer mediation cell shall consist of such persons as may be prescribed. 
(4) Every consumer mediation cell shall maintain— 
(a) a list of empanelled mediators; 
(b) a list of cases handled by the cell; 
(c) record of proceeding; and 
(d) any other information as may be specified by regulations. 
(5) Every consumer mediation cell shall submit a quarterly report to the District Commission, State 
Commission or the National Commission to which it is attached, in the manner specified by regulations. 
75. Empanelment of mediators.—(1) For the purpose of mediation, the National Commission or the 
State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of the mediators 
to be maintained by the consumer mediation cell attached to it, on the recommendation of a selection 
committee consisting of the President and a member of that Commission. 
(2) The qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the procedure for 
empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee payable to empanelled mediator, the 
terms and conditions for empanelment, the code of conduct for empanelled mediators, the grounds on 
which, and the manner in which, empanelled mediators shall be removed or empanelment shall be 
cancelled and other matters relating thereto, shall be such as may be specified by regulations. 
(3) The panel of mediators prepared under sub-section (1) shall be valid for a period of five years, and 
the empanelled mediators shall be eligible to be considered for re-empanelment for another term, subject 
to such conditions as may be specified by regulations. 
76.  Nomination of mediators from panel.—The District Commission, the State Commission or the 
National Commission shall, while nominating any person from the panel of mediators referred to in 
section 75, consider his suitability for resolving the consumer dispute involved. 
77. Duty of mediator to disclose certain facts.—It shall be the duty of the mediator to disclose— 
(a) any personal, professional or financial interest in the outcome of the consumer dispute; 
(b) the circumstances which may give rise to a justifiable doubt as to his independence or 
impartiality; and 
(c) such other facts as may be specified by regulations. 
78. Replacement of mediator in certain cases.—Where the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied, on the information furnished by 

31 
 
the mediator or on the information received from any other person including parties to the complaint and 
after hearing the mediator, it shall replace such mediator by another mediator. 
79. Procedure for mediation.—(1) The mediation shall be held in the consumer mediation cell 
attached to the District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may 
be. 
(2) Where a consumer dispute is referred for mediation by the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, the mediator nominated by such 
Commission shall have regard to the rights and obligations of the parties, the usages of trade, if any, the 
circumstances giving rise to the consumer dispute and such other relevant factors, as he may deem 
necessary and shall be guided by the principles of natural justice while carrying out mediation. 
(3) The mediator so nominated shall conduct mediation within such time and in such manner as may 
be specified by regulations. 
80. Settlement through mediation.—(1) Pursuant to mediation, if an agreement is reached between 
the parties with respect to all of the issues involved in the consumer dispute or with respect to only some 
of the issues, the terms of such agreement shall be reduced to writing accordingly, and signed by the 
parties to such dispute or their authorised representatives. 
(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and forward the signed agreement 
along with such report to the concerned Commission. 
(3) Where no agreement is reached between the parties within the specified time or the mediator is of 
the opinion that settlement is not possible, he shall prepare his report accordingly and submit the same to 
the concerned Commission. 
81. Recording settlement and passing of order.—(1) The District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall, within seven days of the receipt of 
the settlement report, pass suitable order recording such settlement of consumer dispute and dispose of the 
matter accordingly. 
(2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in part, the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record settlement of the issues which 
have been so settled and continue to hear other issues involved in such consumer dispute. 
(3) Where the consumer dispute could not be settled by mediation, the District Commission or the 
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall continue to hear all the issues 
involved in such consumer dispute. 
CHAPTER VI 
PRODUCT LIABILITY 
82. Application of Chapter.—This Chapter shall apply to every claim for compensation under a 
product liability action by a complainant for any harm caused by a defective product manufactured by a 
product manufacturer or serviced by a product service provider or sold by a product seller. 
83. Product liability action.—A product liability action may be brought by a complainant against a 
product manufacturer or a product service provider or a product seller, as the case may be, for any harm 
caused to him on account of a defective product. 
84. Liability of product manufacturer.—(1) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product 
liability action, if— 
(a) the product contains a manufacturing defect; or 
(b) the product is defective in design; or 
(c) there is a deviation from manufacturing specifications; or 
(d) the product does not conform to the express warranty; or 

32 
 
(e) the product fails to contain adequate instructions of correct usage to prevent any harm or any 
warning regarding improper or incorrect usage. 
(2) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action even if he proves that he was 
not negligent or fraudulent in making the express warranty of a product. 
85. Liability of product service provider.—A product service provider shall be liable in a product 
liability action, if— 
(a) the service provided by him was faulty or imperfect or deficient or inadequate in quality, nature or 
manner of performance which is required to be provided by or under any law for the time being in force, 
or pursuant to any contract or otherwise; or 
(b) there was an act of omission or commission or negligence or conscious withholding any 
information which caused harm; or 
(c) the service provider did not issue adequate instructions or warnings to prevent any harm; or 
(d) the service did not conform to express warranty or the terms and conditions of the contract. 
86. Liability of product sellers.—A product seller who is not a product manufacturer shall be liable 
in a product liability action, if— 
(a) he has exercised substantial control over the designing, testing, manufacturing, packaging or 
labelling of a product that caused harm; or 
(b) he has altered or modified the product and such alteration or modification was the substantial 
factor in causing the harm; or 
(c) he has made an express warranty of a product independent of any express warranty made by a 
manufacturer and such product failed to conform to the express warranty made by the product seller 
which caused the harm; or 
(d) the product has been sold by him and the identity of product manufacturer of such product is 
not known, or if known, the service of notice or process or warrant cannot be effected on him or he is 
not subject to the law which is in force in India or the order, if any, passed or to be passed cannot be 
enforced against him; or 
(e) he failed to exercise reasonable care in assembling, inspecting or maintaining such product or 
he did not pass on the warnings or instructions of the product manufacturer regarding the dangers 
involved or proper usage of the product while selling such product and such failure was the proximate 
cause of the harm. 
87. Exceptions to product liability action.—(1) A product liability action cannot be brought against 
the product seller if, at the time of harm, the product was misused, altered, or modified. 
(2) In any product liability action based on the failure to provide adequate warnings or instructions, 
the product manufacturer shall not be liable, if— 
(a) the product was purchased by an employer for use at the workplace and the product 
manufacturer had provided warnings or instructions to such employer; 
(b) the product was sold as a component or material to be used in another product and necessary 
warnings or instructions were given by the product manufacturer to the purchaser of such component 
or material, but the harm was caused to the complainant by use of the end product in which such 
component or material was used; 
(c) the product was one which was legally meant to be used or dispensed only by or under the 
supervision of an expert or a class of experts and the product manufacturer had employed reasonable 
means to give the warnings or instructions for usage of such product to such expert or class of 
experts; or 
(d) the complainant, while using such product, was under the influence of alcohol or any 
prescription drug which had not been prescribed by a medical practitioner. 

33 
 
(3) A product manufacturer shall not be liable for failure to instruct or warn about a danger which is 
obvious or commonly known to the user or consumer of such product or which, such user or consumer, 
ought to have known, taking into account the characteristics of such product. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
88. Penalty for non-compliance of direction of Central Authority.—Whoever, fails to comply 
with any direction of the Central Authority under sections 20 and 21, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to twenty lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
89. Punishment for false or misleading advertisement.—Any manufacturer or service provider 
who causes a false or misleading advertisement to be made which is prejudicial to the interest of 
consumers shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine 
which may extend to ten lakh rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees. 
90. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or storing, selling or distributing or importing 
products containing adulterant.—(1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, 
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any product containing an adulterant shall 
be punished, if such act— 
(a) does not result in any injury to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees; 
(b) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; 
(c) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees; and 
(d) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than 
ten lakh rupees. 
(2) The offences under clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of first conviction, 
suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section, under any law for the time being 
in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second or subsequent conviction, cancel the licence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “adulterant” means any material including extraneous matter which is employed or used for 
making a product unsafe; 
(b) “grievous hurt” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 320 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
91. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or for storing or selling or distributing or importing 
spurious goods.—(1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or 
stores or sells or distributes or imports any spurious goods shall be punished, if such act— 
(a) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; 
(b) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees; 
(c) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years, but may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than ten 
lakh rupees. 

34 
 
(2) The offences under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of first 
conviction, suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section, under any law for 
the time being in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second or subsequent conviction, 
cancel the licence. 
92. Cognizance of offence by court.—No cognizance shall be taken by a competent court of any 
offence under sections 88 and 89 except on a complaint filed by the Central Authority or any officer 
authorised by it in this behalf. 
93. Vexatious search.—The Director General or any other officer, exercising powers under section 
22, who knows that there are no reasonable grounds for so doing, and yet— 
(a) searches, or causes to be searched any premises; or 
(b) seizes any record, register or other document or article, shall, for every such offence, be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees or with both. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
94. Measures to prevent unfair trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling, etc.—For the 
purposes of preventing unfair trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling and also to protect the interest 
and rights of consumers, the Central Government may take such measures in the manner as may be 
prescribed. 
95. Presidents, members, Chief Commissioner, Commissioner and certain officers to be public 
servants.—The Presidents and members of the District Commission, the State Commission and the 
National Commission, and officers and other employees thereof, the Chief Commissioner and the 
Commissioner of the Central Authority, the Director General, the Additional Director General, the 
Director, the Joint Director, the Deputy Director and the Assistant Director and all other officers and 
employees of the Central Authority and other persons performing any duty under this Act, while acting or 
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
96. Compounding of offences.—(1) Any offence punishable under sections 88 and 89, may, either 
before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded, on payment of such amount as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no compounding of such offence shall be made without the leave of the court before 
which a complaint has been filed under section 92: 
Provided further that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine, which 
may be imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded. 
(2) The Central Authority or any officer as may be specially authorised by him in this behalf, may 
compound offences under sub-section (1). 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to person who commits the same or similar offence, within 
a period of three years from the date on which the first offence, committed by him, was compounded. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent offence committed after 
the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the offence was previously compounded, 
shall be deemed to be a first offence. 
(4) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so 
compounded. 
(5) The acceptance of the sum of money for compounding an offence in accordance with sub-section 
(1) by the Central Authority or an officer of the Central Authority empowered in this behalf shall be 

35 
 
deemed to amount to an acquittal within the meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974). 
97. Manner of crediting penalty.—The penalty collected under section 21 and the amount collected 
under section 96 shall be credited to such fund as may be prescribed. 
98. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Presidents and members of the District Commission, the State Commission and the 
National Commission, the Chief Commissioner, the Commissioner, any officer or employee and other 
person performing any duty under this Act, for any act which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of this Act or under any rule or order made thereunder. 
99. Power to give directions by Central Government.—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Central Authority, shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its 
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government 
may give in writing to it from time to time: 
Provided that the Central Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its 
views before any direction is given under this sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final. 
100.  Act not in derogation of any other law.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
101. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out any of the provisions contained in this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for, — 
(a) the other class or classes of persons including public utility entities under clause (19) of 
section 2; 
(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill which are to be exempted under item (b) of sub-
clause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2; 
(c) the manner of issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for goods sold or services rendered under 
sub-clause (vii) of clause (47) of section 2; 
(d) the number of other official or non-official members of the Central Council under clause (b) 
of sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(e) the time and place of meeting of Central Council and the procedure for the transaction of its 
business under sub-section (2) of section 4; 
(f) the number of Commissioners in the Central Authority under sub-section (2) of section 10; 
(g) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of 
office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chief Commissioner and other Commissioners of the Central Authority under section 11; 
(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the Central Authority under sub-section (2) of section 13; 
(i) the qualifications for appointment of Director General, Additional Director General, Director, 
Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director and the manner of appointment under sub-
section (2) of section 15; 
(j) the manner of taking copies or extracts of document, record or article seized or produced 
before returning to the person under sub-section (3) of section 22; 
(k) the officer and the manner of disposing of articles which are subject to speedy or natural 
decay under sub-section (4) of section 22; 

36 
 
(l) the form and manner for preparing annual statement of accounts by the Central Authority in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India under sub-section (1) of section 26; 
(m) the form in which, and the time within which, an annual report, other reports and returns may 
be prepared by the Central Authority under sub-section (1) of section 27; 
(n) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of 
office, resignation and removal of President and members of the District Commission under section 
29; 
(o) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the District Commission shall have 
jurisdiction to entertain complaints under proviso to sub-section (1) of section 34; 
(p) the manner of electronically filing complaint under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 
35; 
(q) the fee, electronic form and the manner of payment of fee for filing complaint under            
sub-section (2) of section 35; 
(r) the cases which may not be referred for settlement by mediation under sub-section (1) of 
section 37; 
(s) the manner of authentication of goods sampled in case of the National Commission under 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38; 
(t) any other matter which may be prescribed under clause (f) of sub-section (9) of section 38; 
(u) the fund where the amount obtained may be credited and the manner of utilisation of such 
amount under sub-section (2) of section 39; 
(v) the form and the manner in which appeal may be preferred to the State Commission under 
section 41; 
(w) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of 
office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the State Commission under section 
43; 
(x) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the State Commission shall have 
jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 47; 
(y) the form and manner of filing appeal to the National Commission, and the manner of 
depositing fifty per cent. of the amount before filing appeal, under sub-section (1) of section 51; 
(z) the number of members of the National Commission under clause (b) of section 54; 
(za) the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal 
and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the National Commission 
under sub-section (1) of section 55; 
(zb) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the National Commission under sub-section (3) of section 57; 
(zc) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the National Commission shall have 
jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58; 
(zd) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the amount under the second proviso to section 67; 
(ze) the form in which the National Commission and the State Commission shall furnish 
information to the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 70; 
(zf) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of section 74; 
(zg) the measures to be taken by the Central Government to prevent unfair trade practices in        
e-commerce, direct selling under section 94; 
(zh) the amount for compounding offences under sub-section (1) of section 96; 

37 
 
(zi) the fund to which the penalty and amount collected shall be credited under section 97; and 
(zj) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provisions are to 
be, or may be, made by rules 
102.  Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Governments may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that the Central Government may, frame model rules in respect of all or any of the 
matters with respect to which the State Government may make rules under this section, and where 
any such model rules have been framed in respect of any such matter, they shall apply to the State 
until the rules in respect of that matter is made by the State Government and while making any such 
rules, so far as is practicable, they shall conform to such model rules. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the other class or classes of persons including public utility entities under clause (19) of 
section 2; 
(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill which are to be exempted under item (b) of 
sub-clause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2; 
(c) the number of other official or non-official members of the State Council under             
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 6; 
(d) the time and place of meeting of the State Council and the procedure for the transaction 
of its business under sub-section (4) of section 6; 
(e) the number of other official and non-official members of District Council under clause 
(b) of sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(f) the time and place of meeting of the District Council and procedure for the transaction of 
its business under sub-section (4) of section 8; 
(g) the number of members of the District Commission under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 28; 
(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
President and members of the District Commission under section 30; 
(i) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the District Commission under sub-section (3) of section 33; 
(j) the manner of authentication of goods sampled by the State Commission and the District 
Commission under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38; 
(k) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the amount before filing appeal under second 
proviso to section 41; 
(l) the number of members of the State Commission under sub-section (3) of section 42; 
(m) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
President and members of the State Commission under section 44; 
(n) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the State Commission under sub-section (3) of section 46; 
(o) the form in which the State Commission shall furnish information to the State 
Government under sub-section (5) of section 70; 
(p) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of section 74; 
(q) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed, or in respect of which provisions 
are to be, or may be, made by rules. 

38 
 
103. Power of National Commission to make regulations.—(1) The National Commission may, 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent 
with this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of 
giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
make provisions for— 
(a) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by the District Commission under the second 
proviso to sub-section (7) of section 38; 
(b) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, under the second proviso to section 52; 
(c) the maintenance of any other information by the consumer mediation cell under           
sub-section (4) of section 74; 
(d) the manner of submission of quarterly report by consumer mediation cell to the District 
Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission under sub-section (5) of            
section 74; 
(e) the qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the procedure for 
empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee payable to empanelled 
mediator, the terms and conditions for empanelment, the code of conduct for empanelled mediators, 
the grounds on which, and the manner in which, empanelled mediators shall be removed or 
empanelment shall be cancelled and the other matters relating thereto under sub-section (2) of 
section 75; 
(f) the conditions for re-empanelment of mediators for another term under sub-section (3) of 
section 75; 
(g) the other facts to be disclosed by mediators under clause (c) of section 77; 
(h) the time within which, and the manner in which, mediation may be conducted under           
sub-section (3) of section 79; and 
(i) such other matter for which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulation. 
104. Power of Central Authority to make regulations.—(1) The Central Authority may, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act, for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the procedure for engaging experts and professionals and the number of such experts and 
professionals under sub-section (3) of section 13; 
(b) the procedure for transaction of business and the allocation of business of the Chief 
Commissioner and Commissioner under sub-section (1) of section 14; 
(c) the form, manner and time within which, inquiries or investigation made by the             
Director-General shall be submitted to the Central Authority under sub-section (5) of section 15; 
and 
(d) such other matter for which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulation. 
105. Rules and regulations to be laid before each House of Parliament.—(1) Every rule and every 
regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 

39 
 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature. 
106. Power to Remove Difficulties.—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
107.  Repeal and savings.—(1) The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 
 


================================================================================
  📄 Environmental laws.pdf
     Pages: 13
================================================================================
1 
 
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986 
_______________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
_______________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS. 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
3. Power of Central Government to take measures to protect and improve environment. 
4. Appointment of officers and their powers and functions. 
5. Power to give directions. 
5A. Appeal to National Green Tribunal. 
6. Rules to regulate environmental pollution. 
CHAPTER III 
PREVENTION, CONTROL AND ABATEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUCTION 
7. Persons carrying on industry, operations, etc., not to allow emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants in excess of the standards. 
8. Persons handling hazardous substances to comply with procedural safeguards. 
9. Furnishing of information to authorities and agencies in certain cases. 
10. Powers of entry and inspection. 
11. Power to take sample and procedure to be followed in connection therewith. 
12. Environmental laboratories. 
13. Government Analysts. 
14. Reports of Government Analysts. 
14A. Penalty for contravention of section 7 or section 8. 
14B. Penalty for contravention of sections 9, 10 and 11. 
15. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act, rules, orders and directions. 
15A. Penalty for contravention by companies. 
15B. Penalty for contravention by Government Department. 
15C. Adjudicating officer. 
15D. Appeal. 
15E. Penalty amount to be credited to Environmental Protection Fund. 
15F. Offence for failure to pay penalty or additional penalty. 
CHAPTER IIIA 
FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
       16. Environmental Protection Fund. 
16A. Accounts and audit of Fund. 
16B. Annual report. 
17. Offences by Government Departments. 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
SECTIONS 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
19. Cognizance of offences. 
20. Information, reports or returns. 
21. Members, officers and employees of the authority constituted under Section 3 to be public 
servants. 
22. Bar of jurisdiction. 
23. Power to delegate. 
24. Effect of other laws. 
25. Power to make rules. 
26. Rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament. 
 

3 
 
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986 
ACT NO. 29 OF1986 
[23rd May, 1986.] 
An Act to provide for the protection and improvement of environment and for matters connected 
therewith. 
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held at 
Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate steps for the protection and 
improvement of human environment; 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary further to implement the decisions aforesaid in so far as 
they relate to the protection and improvement of environment and the prevention of hazards to human 
beings, other living creatures, plants and property; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for 
different areas. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “environment” includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship which exists among and 
between water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures, plants, micro-organism and 
property; 
(b) “environmental pollutant” means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance present in such 
concentration as may be, or tend to be, injurious to environment; 
(c) “environmental pollution” means the presence in the environment of any environmental 
pollutant; 
2[(ca) “Fund” means the Environmental Protection Fund established under section 16;] 
(d) “handling”, in relation to any substance, means the manufacture, processing, treatment, 
package, storage, transportation, use, collection, destruction, conversion, offering for sale, transfer or 
the like of such substance; 
(e) “hazardous substance” means any substance or preparation which, by reason of its chemical or 
physico-chemical properties or handling, is liable to cause harm to human beings, other living 
creatures, plants, micro-organism, property or the environment; 
(f) “occupier”, in relation to any factory or premises, means a person who has control over the 
affairs of the factory or the premises and includes, in relation to any substance, the person in 
possession of the substance; 
                                                           
1. 19th November, 1986, vide notification No. G.S.R.1198(E), dated 12thNovember, 1986, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3(i). 
2. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1-4-2024). 

4 
 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
3. Power of Central Government to take measures to protect and improve environment.—(1) 
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have the power to take all such 
measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of 
the environment and preventing, controlling and abating environmental pollution. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), such 
measures may include measures with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) co-ordination of actions by the State Governments, officers and other authorities— 
(a) under this Act, or the rules made thereunder; or 
(b) under any other law for the time being in force which is relatable to the objects of this 
Act; 
(ii) planning and execution of a nation-wide programme for the prevention, control and 
abatement of environmental pollution; 
(iii) laying down standards for the quality of environment in its various aspects; 
(iv) laying down standards for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from various 
sources whatsoever: 
Provided that different standards for emission or discharge may be laid down under this clause 
from different sources having regard to the quality or composition of the emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants from such sources; 
(v) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or processes or class of industries, 
operations or processes shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain safeguards; 
(vi) laying down procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents which may cause 
environmental pollution and remedial measures for such accidents; 
(vii) laying down procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances; 
(viii) examination of such manufacturing processes, materials and substances as are likely to 
cause environmental pollution; 
(ix) carrying out and sponsoring investigations and research relating to problems of 
environmental pollution; 
(x) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment, machinery, manufacturing or other processes, 
materials or substances and giving, by order, of such directions to such authorities, officers or persons 
as it may consider necessary to take steps for the prevention, control and abatement of environmental 
pollution; 
(xi) establishment or recognition of environmental laboratories and institutes to carry out the 
functions entrusted to such environmental laboratories and institutes under this Act; 
(xii) collection and dissemination of information in respect of matters relating to environmental 
pollution; 
(xiii) preparation of manuals, codes or guides relating to the prevention, control and abatement of 
environmental pollution; 
(xiv) such other matters as the Central Government deems necessary or expedient for the purpose 
of securing the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 

5 
 
(3) The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for the purposes of 
this Act, by order, published in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority or authorities by such name or 
names as may be specified in the order for the purpose of exercising and performing such of the powers 
and functions (including the power to issue directions under section 5) of the Central Government under 
this Act and for taking measures with respect to such of the matters referred to in sub-section (2) as may 
be mentioned in the order and subject to the supervision and control of the Central Government and the 
provisions of such order, such authority or authorities may exercise the powers or perform the functions 
or take the measures so mentioned in the order as if such authority or authorities had been empowered by 
this Act to exercise those powers or perform those functions or take such measures. 
4. Appointment of officers and their powers and functions.—(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 3, the Central Government may appoint officers with such 
designations as it thinks fit for the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them such of the powers and 
functions under this Act as it may deem fit. 
(2) The officers appointed under sub-section (1) shall be subject to the general control and direction 
of the Central Government or, if so directed by that Government, also of the authority or authorities, if 
any, constituted under sub-section (3) of section 3 or of any other authority or officer. 
5. Power to give directions.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law but subject to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its 
functions under this Act, issue directions in writing to any person, officer or any authority and such 
person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
Explanation.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue directions 
under this section includes the power to direct— 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process; or 
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or any other service. 
1[5A. Appeal to National Green Tribunal.—Any person aggrieved by any directions issues under 
section 5, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, may file an appeal to 
the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, in 
accordance with the provisions of that Act.] 
6. Rules to regulate environmental pollution.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules in respect of all or any of the matters referred to in section 3. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the standards of quality of air, water or soil for various areas and purposes; 
(b) the maximum allowable limits of concentration of various environmental pollutants (including 
noise) for different areas; 
(c) the procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances; 
(d) the prohibition and restrictions on the handling of hazardous substances in different areas; 
(e) the prohibition and restrictions on the location of industries and the carrying on of processes 
and operations in different areas; 
(f) the procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents which may cause environmental 
pollution and for providing for remedial measures for such accidents. 
CHAPTER III 
PREVENTION, CONTROL AND ABATEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUCTION 
7. Persons carrying on industry, operation, etc., not to allow emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants in excess of the standards.—No person carrying on any industry, operation 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 2010, s. 36 and Schedule III (w.e.f. 18-10-2010). 

6 
 
or process shall discharge or emit or permit to be discharged or emitted any environmental pollutant in 
excess or such standards as may be prescribed. 
8. Persons handling hazardous substances to comply with procedural safeguards.—No person 
shall handle or cause to be handled any hazardous substance except in accordance with such procedure 
and after complying with such safeguards as may be prescribed. 
9. Furnishing of information to authorities and agencies in certain cases.—(1) Where the 
discharge of any environmental pollutant in excess of the prescribed standards occurs or is apprehended 
to occur due to any accident or other unforeseen act or event, the person responsible for such discharge 
and the person in charge of the place at which such discharge occurs or is apprehended to occur shall be 
bound to prevent or mitigate the environmental pollution caused as a result of such discharge and shall 
also forthwith— 
(a) intimate the fact of such occurrence or apprehension of such occurrence; and 
(b) be bound, if called upon, to render all assistance, 
to such authorities or agencies as may be prescribed. 
(2) On receipt of information with respect to the fact or apprehension of any occurrence of the nature 
referred to in sub-section (1), whether through intimation under that sub-section or otherwise, the 
authorities or agencies referred to in sub-section (1) shall, as early as practicable, cause such remedial 
measures to be taken as are necessary to prevent or mitigate the environmental pollution. 
(3) The expenses, if any, incurred by any authority or agency with respect to the remedial measures 
referred to in sub-section (2), together with interest (at such reasonable rate as the Government may, by 
order, fix) from the date when a demand for the expenses is made until it is paid, may be recovered by 
such authority or agency from the person concerned as arrears of land revenue or of public demand. 
10. Powers of entry and inspection.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person 
empowered by the Central Government in this behalf shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable times 
with such assistance as he considers necessary, any place— 
(a) for the purpose of performing any of the functions of the Central Government entrusted to 
him; 
(b) for the purpose of determining whether and if so in what manner, any such functions are to be 
performed or whether any provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any notice, order, 
direction or authorisation served, made, given or granted under this Act is being or has been complied 
with; 
(c) for the purpose of examining and testing any equipment, industrial plant, record, register, 
document or any other material object or for conducting a search of any building in which he has 
reason to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder has been or is being or is 
about to be committed and for seizing any such equipment, industrial plant, record, register, 
document or other material object if he has reasons to believe that it may furnish evidence of the 
commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder or that such seizure 
is necessary to prevent or mitigate environmental pollution. 
1[(2) Every person carrying on any industry, operation or process of handling any hazardous 
substance shall render assistance, as may be required, to the person empowered by the Central 
Government under sub-section (1) for carrying out the functions under that sub-section and if he fails to 
do so without any reasonable cause, he shall be liable to penalty provided under section 14B. 
(3) If any person willfully delays or obstructs any person empowered by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) in the performance of his functions under sub-sections (1) or (2), he shall be liable 
to penalty provided under section 14B. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for sub-sections (2) to (4) (w.e.f. 1-4-2024). 

7 
 
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizures under this section as they apply to any search or seizures made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of that Code.] 
11. Power to take sample and procedure to be followed in connection therewith.—(1) The 
Central Government or any officer empowered by it in this behalf, shall have power to take, for the 
purpose of analysis, samples of air, water, soil or other substance from any factory, premises or other 
place in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The result of any analysis of a sample taken under sub-section (1) shall not be admissible in 
evidence in any legal proceeding unless the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) are complied with. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the person taking the sample under sub-section (1) 
shall,— 
(a) serve on the occupier or his agent or person in charge of the place, a notice, then and there, in 
such form as may be prescribed, of his intention to have it so analysed; 
(b) in the presence of the occupier or his agent or person, collect a sample for analysis; 
(c) cause the sample to be placed in a container or containers which shall be marked and sealed 
and shall also be signed both by the person taking the sample and the occupier or his agent or person; 
(d) send without delay, the container or the containers to the laboratory established or recognised 
by the Central Government under section 12. 
(4) When a sample is taken for analysis under sub-section (1) and the person taking the sample serves 
on the occupier or his agent or person, a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3), then,— 
(a) in a case where the occupier, his agent or person wilfully absents himself, the person taking 
the sample shall collect the sample for analysis to be placed in a container or containers which shall 
be marked and sealed and shall also be signed by the person taking the sample, and 
(b) in a case where the occupier or his agent or person present at the time of taking the sample 
refuses to sign the marked and sealed container or containers of the sample as required under clause 
(c) of sub-section (3), the marked and sealed container or containers shall be signed by the person 
taking the samples, 
and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the person taking the sample for analysis to 
the laboratory established or recognised under section 12 and such person shall inform the Government 
Analyst appointed or recognised under section 13 in writing, about the wilful absence of the occupier or 
his agent or person, or, as the case may be, his refusal to sign the container or containers. 
12. Environmental laboratories.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette,— 
(a) establish one or more environmental laboratories; 
(b) recognise one or more laboratories or institutes as environmental laboratories to carry out the 
functions entrusted to an environmental laboratory under this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules specifying— 
(a) the functions of the environmental laboratory; 
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said laboratory of samples of air, water, soil or other 
substance for analysis or tests, the form of the laboratory report thereon and the fees payable for such 
report; 
(c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable that laboratory to carry out its 
functions. 

8 
 
13. Government Analysts.—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint or recognise such persons as it thinks fit and having the prescribed qualifications to be 
Government Analysts for the purpose of analysis of samples of air, water, soil or other substance sent for 
analysis to any environmental laboratory established or recognised under sub-section (1) of section 12. 
14. Reports of Government Analysts.—Any document purporting to be a report signed by a 
Government Analyst may be used as evidence of the facts stated therein in any proceeding under this Act. 
1[14A. Penalty for contravention of section 7 or section 8.—(1) If any person, contravenes 
provisions of section 7 or section 8 or the rules made thereunder, he shall be liable to penalty in respect of 
each such contravention, which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to fifteen 
lakh rupees. 
(2) Where any person continues contravention under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to additional 
penalty of fifty thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention continues. 
14B. Penalty for contravention of sections 9, 10 and 11.—(1) If any person contravenes or does not 
comply with the provisions of section 9, section 10 or section 11 or orders or directions issued under 
those sections, he shall be liable to penalty in respect of each such contravention which shall not be less 
than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees. 
(2) Where any person continues contravention under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to additional 
penalty of ten thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention continues.] 
2[15. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act, rules, orders and directions.—(1) Where any 
person contravenes or does not comply with any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made or orders 
or directions issued thereunder for which no penalty is provided, he shall be liable to penalty in respect of 
each such contravention which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to fifteen 
lakh rupees.  
(2) Where any person continues contravention under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to additional 
penalty of ten thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention continues. 
15A. Penalty for contravention by companies.—(1) Where any company contravenes any of the 
provisions of this Act, the company shall be liable to penalty for each such contravention which shall not 
be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees. 
(2) Where any company continues contravention under sub-section (1), the company shall be liable to 
additional penalty of one lakh rupees for every day during which such contravention continues. 
15B. Penalty for contravention by Government Department.—(1) Where contravention of any of 
the provision of this Act has been committed by any Department of the Central Government or the State 
Government, the Head of the Department shall be liable to penalty equal to one month of his basic salary: 
Provided that he shall not be liable for such contravention, if he proves that the contravention was 
committed without his knowledge or instructions or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such 
contravention. 
(2) Where any contravention under sub-section (1) is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
officer, other than the Head of the Department, the officer shall be liable to penalty equal to one month of 
his basic salary: 
Provided that he shall not be liable for the contravention, if he proves that he exercised all due 
diligence to avoid such contravention. 
15C. Adjudicating officer.—(1) The Central Government, for the purposes of determining the 
penalties under this Act, may appoint an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1-4-2024). 
2. Subs. by s. 2 and Schedule, ibid., for sections 15 to 17 (w.e.f. 1-4-2024).  

9 
 
of India or a Secretary to the State Government to be the adjudicating officer, to hold an inquiry and to 
impose penalty in the manner, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be required. 
(2) The adjudicating officer may— 
(a) call upon any person alleged to have contravened or not complied with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder or having the knowledge of the facts and circumstances of the 
case; 
(b) require such person to produce any record, register or other document in his possession or any 
other document, which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer may be relevant to the subject-
matter. 
(3) The adjudicating officer shall, after giving the person a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
the matter, and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person concerned has contravened or has not 
complied with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, he may impose such penalty as he 
thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of sections 14A, 14B, 15, 15A or section 15B, as the case may 
be. 
(4) The adjudicating officer, while adjudicating the quantum of penalty under sub-section (3), shall 
have due regard to the following, namely:— 
(a) the population and the area impacted or affected due to such contravention or non-
compliance; 
(b) the frequency and duration of such contravention or non-compliance; 
(c) the vulnerability of the class of persons likely to be adversely affected by such contravention 
or non-compliance; 
(d) the damage caused or likely to be caused to any person, as a result of such contravention or 
non-compliance, if any; 
(e) the undue gain derived out of such contravention or non-compliance; and 
(f) such other factor, as may be prescribed. 
(5) The amount of penalty imposed under the provisions of sections 14A, 14B, 15, 15A or 15B, as the 
case may be, shall be in addition to the liability to pay relief or compensation under section 15 read with 
section 17 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010). 
15D. Appeal.—(1) Whoever aggrieved by the order, passed by the adjudicating officer under this Act 
may prefer an appeal to the National Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green 
Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010). 
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within sixty days from the date on which the 
copy of the order made by the adjudicating officer is received by the aggrieved person. 
(3) The Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such 
order as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against. 
(4) Where an appeal is preferred against any order of the adjudicating officer under sub-section (1), 
such appeal shall not be entertained by the Tribunal unless such person has deposited with the Tribunal 
ten per cent. of the amount of the penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer. 
15E. Penalty amount to be credited to Environmental Protection Fund.—Where any penalty or 
additional penalty, as the case may be, is imposed under sections 14A, 14B, 15, 15A or section 15B, the 
amount of the penalty shall be credited to the Environmental Protection Fund established under                  
section 16. 

10 
 
15F. Offence for failure to pay penalty or additional penalty.—(1) Where any person fails to pay 
the penalty or additional penalty, as the case may be, under sections 14A, 14B, 15, 15A or section 15B 
within ninety days of such imposition, he shall be liable for imprisonment which may extend to three 
years or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the penalty or with both. 
(2) Where any offence under sub-section (1) has been committed by a company, every person who, at 
the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
offence and he shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any person liable to any punishment 
provided in sub-section (1), if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), where an offence has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “company” includes body corporate, firm, trust, society and any other association of individuals; 
(b) “director” includes director of the company, partner of the firm, members of the society or trust or 
member of any association of individuals, as the case may be.] 
1[CHAPTER IIIA 
FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
16. Environmental Protection Fund.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish a fund to be known as the Environmental Protection Fund. 
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund— 
(a) the amount of penalty imposed under the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
(14 of 1981), and under this Act; 
(b) the interest or other income received out of investments made from the Fund; and 
(c) any other amount from such sources, as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Fund shall be applied for— 
(a) the promotion of awareness, education and research for the protection of environment; 
(b) the expenses for achieving the objects and for purposes of the Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981(14 of 1981) and under this Act; 
(c) such other purposes, as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Central Government shall notify the administrator for the administration of the Fund and 
other matters connected therewith and incidental thereto in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Central Government shall allocate seventy-five per cent. of the amount of penalties to the 
State Governments or Union territory administrations, which has been credited to the Fund. 
16A. Accounts and audit of Fund.—(1) The Central Government shall maintain separate accounts 
and other relevant records in relation to the Environmental Protection Fund and prepare an annual 
statement of accounts in such form, as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1-4-2024). 

11 
 
(2) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and such audited accounts together with the audit report 
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government. 
16B. Annual report.—The Central Government shall prepare its annual report in relation to 
Environmental Protection Fund giving a full account of its activities defined under this Act in such form, 
as may be prescribed, for each financial year during the previous financial year, and shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament along with audit report given by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India.] 
 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer or other employee of the Government or any authority 
constituted under this Act or any member, officer or other employee of such authority in respect of 
anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance of this Act or the rules made or 
orders or directions issued thereunder. 
19. Cognizance of offences.—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
a complaint made by,— 
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that 
Government; or 
1[(aa) adjudicating officer or any officer authorised by him in this behalf;] 
(b) any person who has given notice of not less than sixty days, in the manner prescribed, of the 
alleged offence and of his intention to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the authority 
or officer authorised as aforesaid. 
20. Information, reports or returns.—The Central Government may, in relation to its functions 
under this Act, from time to time, require any person, officer, State Government or other authority to 
furnish to it or any prescribed authority or officer any reports, returns, statistics, accounts and other 
information and such person, officer, State Government or other authority shall be bound to do so. 
21. Members, officers and employees of the authority constituted under section 3 to be public 
servants.—All the members of the authority, constituted, if any, under section 3 and all officers and other 
employees of such authority when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any provisions of this Act or 
the rules made or orders or directions issued thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
22. Bar of jurisdiction.—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of anything done, action taken or order or direction issued by the Central Government or any 
other authority or officer in pursuance of any power conferred by or in relation to its or his functions 
under this Act. 
23. Power to delegate.—Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 3, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate, subject to such conditions and 
limitations as may be specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions under this Act [except 
the power to constitute an authority under sub-section (3) of section 3 and to make rules under section 25] 
as it may deem necessary or expedient, to any officer, State Government or other authority. 
2[24. Effect of other laws.—The provisions of this Act and the rules or orders made thereunder shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
in force.] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1-4-2024). 
2. Subs. by s. 2 and Schedule, ibid., for section 24 (w.e.f. 1-4-2024). 

12 
 
 
25. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the standards in excess of which environmental pollutants shall not be discharged or emitted 
under section 7; 
(b) the procedure in accordance with and the safeguards in compliance with which hazardous 
substances shall be handled or cause to be handled under section 8; 
(c) the authorities or agencies to which intimation of the fact of occurrence or apprehension of 
occurrence of the discharge of any environmental pollutant in excess of the prescribed standards shall 
be given and to whom all assistance shall be bound to be rendered under sub-section (1) of section 9; 
(d) the manner in which samples of air, water, soil or other substance for the purpose of analysis 
shall be taken under sub-section (1) of section 11; 
(e) the form in which notice of intention to have a sample analysed shall be served under                     
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 11; 
(f) the functions of the environmental laboratories, the procedure for the submission to such 
laboratories of samples of air, water, soil and other substances for analysis or test; the form of 
laboratory report; the fees payable for such report and other matters to enable such laboratories to 
carry out their functions under sub-section (2) of section 12; 
(g) the qualifications of Government Analyst appointed or recognised for the purpose of analysis 
of samples of air, water, soil or other substances under section 13; 
1[(ga) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalty by the adjudicating officer under                  
sub-section (1) and other factors for determining quantum of penalty under clause (f) of                     
sub-section (4) of section 15C; 
(gb) the other amount under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 16; 
(gc) the other purposes under clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 16; 
(gd) the manner of administration of Fund under sub-section (4) of section 16; 
(ge) form for maintenance of accounts of the Fund and for preparation of annual statement of 
accounts under sub-section (1) of section 16A; 
(gf) form for preparing annual report of the Fund under section 16B;] 
(h) the manner in which notice of the offence and of the intention to make a complaint to the 
Central Government shall be given under clause (b) of section 19; 
(i) the authority or officer to whom any reports, returns, statistics accounts and other information 
shall be furnished under section 20; 
(j) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
26. Rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament.—Every rule made under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1-4-2024). 

13 
 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 


================================================================================
  📄 Information Technology Act 2000.pdf
     Pages: 41
================================================================================
1 
 
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000 
––––––––– 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
––––––––– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE 
3. Authentication of electronic records. 
3A. Electronic signature. 
CHAPTER III 
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE 
4. Legal recognition of electronic records. 
5. Legal recognition of electronic signatures. 
6. Use of electronic records and electronic signatures in Government and its agencies. 
6A. Delivery of services by service provider. 
7. Retention of electronic records. 
7A. Audit of documents, etc., maintained in electronic form. 
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette. 
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted in electronic form. 
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of electronic signature. 
10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means. 
CHAPTER IV 
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS 
11. Attribution of electronic records. 
12. Acknowledgment of receipt. 
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record. 
CHAPTER V 
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SECURE ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE 
14. Secure electronic record. 
15. Secure electronic signature. 
16. Security procedure and practices. 
CHAPTER VI 
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES 
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers. 
18. Functions of Controller. 
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities. 
20. [Omitted.] 
21. Licence to issue electronic signature Certificates. 
22. Application for licence. 
23. Renewal of licence. 
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence. 
25. Suspension of licence. 
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence. 

2 
 
SECTIONS 
27. Power to delegate. 
28. Power to investigate contraventions. 
29. Access to computers and data. 
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures. 
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc. 
32. Display of licence. 
33. Surrender of licence. 
34. Disclosure. 
CHAPTER VII 
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE CERTIFICATES 
35. Certifying authority to issue electronic signature Certificate. 
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital signature Certificate. 
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate. 
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate. 
39. Notice of suspension or revocation. 
CHAPTER VIII 
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS 
40. Generating key pair. 
40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate. 
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate. 
42. Control of private key. 
CHAPTER IX 
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION 
43. Penalty and compensation for damage to computer, computer system, etc. 
43A. Compensation for failure to protect data. 
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc. 
45. Residuary penalty. 
46. Power to adjudicate. 
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer. 
CHAPTER X 
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 
48. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal. 
49. [Omitted.] 
50. [Omitted.] 
51. [Omitted.] 
52. [Omitted.] 
52A. [Omitted.] 
52B. [Omitted.] 
52C. [Omitted.] 
52D. Decision by majority. 
53.  [Omitted.] 
54. [Omitted.] 
55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings. 
56. [Omitted.] 
57. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal. 
58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal. 
59. Right to legal representation. 
60. Limitation. 
61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. 
62. Appeal to High Court. 
63. Compounding of contraventions. 

3 
 
SECTIONS 
64. Recovery of penalty. 
CHAPTER XI 
OFFENCES 
65. Tampering with computer source documents. 
66. Computer related offences. 
66A. [Omitted.]. 
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device. 
66C. Punishment for identity theft. 
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource. 
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy. 
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism. 
67.   Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form. 
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., in 
electronic form. 
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually explicit act, 
etc., in electronic form. 
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries. 
68. Power of Controller to give directions. 
69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information through 
any computer resource. 
69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any 
computer resource. 
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any computer 
resource for cyber security. 
70. Protected system. 
70A. National nodal agency. 
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident response. 
71. Penalty for misrepresentation. 
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy. 
72A. Penalty for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract. 
73. Penalty for publishing electronic signature Certificate false in certain particulars. 
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose. 
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India. 
76. Confiscation. 
77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment. 
77A. Compounding of offences. 
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable. 
78. Power to investigate offences. 
CHAPTER XII 
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES 
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases. 
CHAPTER XIIA 
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE 
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence. 
CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc. 
81. Act to have overriding effect. 
81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque. 
82. Chairperson, Members, officers and employees to be public servants. 
83. Power to give directions. 

4 
 
SECTIONS 
84. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
84A. Modes or methods for encryption. 
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences. 
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences. 
85. Offences by companies. 
86. Removal of difficulties. 
87. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee. 
89. Power of Controller to make regulations. 
90. Power of State Government to make rules. 
91. [Omitted]. 
92. [Omitted]. 
93. [Omitted]. 
94. [Omitted]. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. [Omitted.] 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. [Omitted.] 
 
 

5 
 
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000 
ACT NO. 21 OF 2000 
[9th June, 2000.] 
An Act to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data 
interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as 
“electronic commerce”, which involve the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of 
communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic filing of documents with 
the Government agencies and further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872, the Banker’s Books Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; 
WHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations by resolution A/RES/51/162, dated the 30th 
January, 1997 has adopted the Model Law on Electronic Commerce adopted by the United Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law; 
AND WHEREAS the said resolution recommends inter alia, that all States give favourable 
consideration to the said Model Law when they enact or revise their laws, in view of the need for 
uniformity of the law applicable to alternatives to paper-based methods of communication and storage of 
information; 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution and to promote efficient 
delivery of Government services by means of reliable electronic records. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:– 
CHAPTER 1 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.–(1) This Act may be called the Information 
Technology Act, 2000. 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to 
any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that 
provision. 
2[(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to documents or transactions specified in the First Schedule: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First 
Schedule by way of addition or deletion of entries thereto. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.] 
2. Definitions.–(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
(a) “access” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means gaining entry into, 
instructing or communicating with the logical, arithmetical, or memory function resources of a 
computer, computer system or computer network; 
(b) “addressee” means a person who is intended by the originator to receive the electronic record 
but does not include any intermediary; 
(c) “adjudicating officer” means an adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section (1) of 
section 46; 
 
                                                           
1. 17th October, 2000, vide notification No. G.S.R. 788 (E), dated 17th October, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,      
Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 3, for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

6 
 
(d) “affixing 1[electronic signature]” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions 
means adoption of any methodology or procedure by a person for the purpose of authenticating an 
electronic record by means of 1[electronic signature]; 
2[(da) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1) of              
section 48;] 
(e) “appropriate Government” means as respects any matter,– 
(i) enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 
(ii) relating to any State law enacted under List III of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution, 
the State Government and in any other case, the Central Government; 
(f) “asymmetric crypto system” means a system of a secure key pair consisting of a private key 
for creating a digital signature and a public key to verify the digital signature; 
(g) “Certifying Authority” means a person who has been granted a licence to issue a 1[electronic 
signature] Certificate under section 24; 
(h) “certification practice statement” means a statement issued by a Certifying Authority to 
specify the practices that the Certifying Authority employs in issuing 1[electronic signature] 
Certificates; 
3[(ha) “communication device” means cell phones, personal digital assistance or combination of 
both or any other device used to communicate, send or transmit any text, video, audio or image;] 
(i) “computer” means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high-speed data processing device 
or system which performs logical, arithmetic, and memory functions by manipulations of electronic, 
magnetic or optical impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software or 
communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or 
computer network; 
4[(j) “computer network” means the inter-connection of one or more computers or computer 
systems or communication device through– 
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or other communication 
media; and 
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers or 
communication device whether or not the inter-connection is continuously maintained;] 
(k) “computer resource” means computer, computer system, computer network, data, computer 
data base or software; 
(l) “computer system” means a device or collection of devices, including input and output support 
devices and excluding calculators which are not programmable and capable of being used in 
conjunction with external files, which contain computer programmes, electronic instructions, input 
data and output data, that performs logic, arithmetic, data storage and retrieval, communication 
control and other functions; 
(m) “Controller” means the Controller of Certifying Authorities appointed under sub-section (1) 
of section 17; 
5* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
3[(na) “cyber cafe” means any facility from where access to the internet is offered by any person 
in the ordinary course of business to the members of the public; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Ins. by 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
3. Ins. by 10 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause (j) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
5. Clause (n) omitted by 7 of 2017, s.169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) 

7 
 
(nb) “cyber security means protecting information, equipment, devices, computer, computer 
resource, communication device and information stored therein from unauthorised access, use, 
disclosure, disruption, modification or destruction;] 
(o) “data” means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions 
which are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised manner, and is intended to be 
processed, is being processed or has been processed in a computer system or computer network, and 
may be in any form (including computer printouts magnetic or optical storage media, punched cards, 
punched tapes) or stored internally in the memory of the computer; 
(p) “digital signature” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of 
an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of section 3; 
(q) “Digital Signature Certificate” means a Digital Signature Certificate issued under sub-section 
(4) of section 35; 
(r) “electronic form” with reference to information, means any information generated, sent, 
received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, micro film, computer generated 
micro fiche or similar device; 
(s) “Electronic Gazette” means the Official Gazette published in the electronic form; 
(t) “electronic record” means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received or 
sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer generated micro fiche; 
1[(ta) “electronic signature” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by 
means of the electronic technique specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature; 
(tb) “Electronic Signature Certificate” means an Electronic Signature Certificate issued under 
section 35 and includes Digital Signature Certificate;] 
(u) “function”, in relation to a computer, includes logic, control, arithmetical process, deletion, 
storage and retrieval and communication or telecommunication from or within a computer; 
1[(ua) Indian Computer Emergency Response Team” means an agency established under sub-
section (1) of Section 70B;] 
(v) “information” includes 2[data, message, text,] images, sound, voice, codes, computer 
programmes, software and data bases or micro film or computer generated micro fiche; 
3[(w) “intermediary”, with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on 
behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect 
to that record and includes telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service 
providers, web-hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction sites, 
online-market places and cyber cafes;] 
(x) “key pair”, in an asymmetric crypto system, means a private key and its mathematically 
related public key, which are so related that the public key can verify a digital signature created by the 
private key; 
(y) “law” includes any Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, Ordinances promulgated by the 
President or a Governor, as the case may be, Regulations made by the President under article 240, 
Bills enacted as President's Act under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 357 of the Constitution 
and includes rules, regulations, bye-laws and orders issued or made thereunder; 
(z) “licence” means a licence granted to a Certifying Authority under section 24; 
(za) “originator” means a person who sends, generates, stores or transmits any electronic message 
or causes any electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any other person but 
does not include an intermediary; 
(zb) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(zc) “private key” means the key of a key pair used to create a digital signature; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “data, text” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause (w) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

8 
 
(zd) “public key” means the key of a key pair used to verify a digital signature and listed in the 
Digital Signature Certificate; 
(ze) “secure system” means computer hardware, software, and procedure that– 
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse; 
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation; 
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and 
(d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures; 
(zf) “security procedure” means the security procedure prescribed under section 16 by the Central 
Government; 
(zg) “subscriber” means a person in whose name the 1[electronic signature] Certificate is issued; 
(zh) “verify”, in relation to a digital signature, electronic record or public key, with its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means to determine whether– 
(a) the initial electronic record was affixed with the digital signature by the use of private key 
corresponding to the public key of the subscriber; 
(b) the initial electronic record is retained intact or has been altered since such electronic 
record was so affixed with the digital signature. 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area. 
CHAPTER II 
2[DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE] 
3. Authentication of electronic records.–(1) Subject to the provisions of this section any subscriber 
may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature. 
(2) The authentication of the electronic record shall be effected by the use of asymmetric crypto 
system and hash function which envelop and transform the initial electronic record into another electronic 
record. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section, “hash function” means an algorithm mapping or 
translation of one sequence of bits into another, generally smaller, set known as “hash result” such that an 
electronic record yields the same hash result every time the algorithm is executed with the same electronic 
record as its input making it computationally infeasible– 
(a) to derive or reconstruct the original electronic record from the hash result produced by the 
algorithm; 
(b) that two electronic records can produce the same hash result using the algorithm. 
(3) Any person by the use of a public key of the subscriber can verify the electronic record. 
(4) The private key and the public key are unique to the subscriber and constitute a functioning key 
pair. 
3[3A. Electronic signature.–(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, but subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (2), a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record by such electronic 
signature or electronic authentication technique which– 
(a) is considered reliable; and 
(b) may be specified in the Second Schedule. 
(2) For the purposes of this section any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique 
shall be considered reliable if– 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for the heading “DIGITAL SIGNATURE” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

9 
 
(a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the context in which they are 
used, linked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and to no other person; 
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of signing, under the 
control of the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and of no other person; 
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature is detectable; 
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic signature is 
detectable; and 
(e) it fulfils such other conditions which may be prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
electronic signature is that of the person by whom it is purported to have been affixed or authenticated. 
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or omit any 
electronic signature or electronic authentication technique and the procedure for affixing such signature 
from the Second Schedule: 
Provided that no electronic signature or authentication technique shall be specified in the Second 
Schedule unless such signature or technique is reliable. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.] 
CHAPTER III 
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE 
4. Legal recognition of electronic records.–Where any law provides that information or any other 
matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed form, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in such law, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such information or matter is– 
(a) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and 
(b) accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference. 
5. Legal recognition of 1[electronic signatures].–Where any law provides that information or any 
other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any document shall be signed or bear the 
signature of any person, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be 
deemed to have been satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated by means of 1[electronic 
signature] affixed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, “signed”, with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, shall, with reference to a person, mean affixing of his hand written signature or any mark on 
any document and the expression “signature” shall be construed accordingly. 
6. Use of electronic records and 1[electronic signatures] in Government and its agencies.–(1) 
Where any law provides for– 
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office, authority, body or 
agency owned or controlled by the appropriate Government in a particular manner; 
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction or approval by whatever name called in a 
particular manner; 
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner, 
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, such requirement 
shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as the case may be, 
is effected by means of such electronic form as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, for the purposes of sub-section (1), by rules, prescribe– 
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic records shall be filed, created or issued; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signatures” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

10 
 
(b) the manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing, creation or issue any 
electronic record under clause (a). 
1[6A. Delivery of services by service provider.–(1) The appropriate Government may, for the 
purposes of this Chapter and for efficient delivery of services to the public through electronic means 
authorise, by order, any service provider to set up, maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities and 
perform such other services as it may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, service provider so authorised includes any individual, 
private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor firm or any such other body or agency 
which has been granted permission by the appropriate Government to offer services through electronic 
means in accordance with the policy governing such service sector. 
(2) The appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider authorised under sub-
section (1) to collect, retain and appropriate such service charges, as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government for the purpose of providing such services, from the person availing such service. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the appropriate Government may authorise the service 
providers to collect, retain and appropriate service charges under this section notwithstanding the fact that 
there is no express provision under the Act, rule, regulation or notification under which the service is 
provided to collect, retain and appropriate e-service charges by the service providers. 
(4) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the scale of 
service charges which may be charged and collected by the service providers under this section: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may specify different scale of service charges for different 
types of services.] 
7. Retention of electronic records.–(1) Where any law provides that documents, records or 
information shall be retained for any specific period, then, that requirement shall be deemed to have been 
satisfied if such documents, records or information are retained in the electronic form, if– 
(a) the information contained therein remains accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent 
reference; 
(b) the electronic record is retained in the format in which it was originally generated, sent or 
received or in a format which can be demonstrated to represent accurately the information originally 
generated, sent or received; 
(c) the details which will facilitate the identification of the origin, destination, date and time of 
despatch or receipt of such electronic record are available in the electronic record: 
Provided that this clause does not apply to any information which is automatically generated 
solely for the purpose of enabling an electronic record to be despatched or received. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any law that expressly provides for the retention of 
documents, records or information in the form of electronic records. 
2[7A. Audit of documents, etc., maintained in electronic form.–Where in any law for the time 
being in force, there is a provision for audit of documents, records or information, that provision shall also 
be applicable for audit of documents, records or information processed and maintained in the electronic 
form.] 
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette.–Where any law provides that any 
rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notification or any other matter shall be published in the Official Gazette, 
then, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such rule, regulation, order, bye-law, 
notification or any other matter is published in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette: 
Provided that where any rule, regulation, order, by-law, notification or any other matter is published 
in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette, the date of publication shall be deemed to be the date of the 
Gazette which was first published in any form. 
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted in electronic 
form.–Nothing contained in sections 6, 7 and 8 shall confer a right upon any person to insist that any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

11 
 
Ministry or Department of the Central Government or the State Government or any authority or body 
established by or under any law or controlled or funded by the Central or State Government should 
accept, issue, create, retain and preserve any document in the form of electronic records or effect any 
monetary transaction in the electronic form. 
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of 1[electronic signature].–The 
Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by rules, prescribe– 
(a) the type of 1[electronic signature]; 
(b) the manner and format in which the 1[electronic signature] shall be affixed; 
(c) the manner or procedure which facilitates identification of the person affixing the 1[electronic 
signature]; 
(d) control processes and procedures to ensure adequate integrity, security and confidentiality of 
electronic records or payments; and 
(e) any other matter which is necessary to give legal effect to 1[electronic signatures]. 
2[10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means.–Where in a contract formation, the 
communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and acceptances, as 
the case may be, are expressed in electronic form or by means of an electronic records, such contract shall 
not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on the ground that such electronic form or means was used for 
that purpose.] 
CHAPTER IV 
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS 
11. Attribution of electronic records.–An electronic record shall be attributed to the originator– 
(a) if it was sent by the originator himself; 
(b) by a person who had the authority to act on behalf of the originator in respect of that 
electronic record; or 
(c) by an information system programmed by or on behalf of the originator to operate 
automatically. 
12. Acknowledgment of receipt.–(1) Where the originator has not 
3[stipulated] that the 
acknowledgment of receipt of electronic record be given in a particular form or by a particular method, an 
acknowledgment may be given by– 
(a) any communication by the addressee, automated or otherwise; or 
(b) any conduct of the addressee, sufficient to indicate to the originator that the electronic record 
has been received. 
(2) Where the originator has stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt of an 
acknowledgment of such electronic record by him, then unless acknowledgment has been so received, the 
electronic record shall he deemed to have been never sent by the originator. 
(3) Where the originator has not stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt 
of such acknowledgment, and the acknowledgment has not been received by the originator within the 
time specified or agreed or, if no time has been specified or agreed to within a reasonable time, then the 
originator may give notice to the addressee stating that no acknowledgment has been received by him and 
specifying a reasonable time by which the acknowledgement must be received by him and if no 
acknowledgment is received within the aforesaid time limit he may after giving notice to the addressee, 
treat the electronic record as though it has never been sent. 
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record.–(1) Save as otherwise agreed to 
between the originator and the addressee, the despatch of an electronic record occurs when it enters a 
computer resource outside the control of the originator. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “agreed with the addressee” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

12 
 
(2) Save  as  otherwise  agreed  between the originator and  the  addressee, the  time  of  receipt of an  
electronic record shall be determined as follows, namely:– 
(a) if the addressee has designated a computer resource for the purpose of receiving electronic 
records,– 
(i) receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record enters the designated computer 
resource; or 
(ii) if the electronic record is sent to a computer resource of the addressee that is not the 
designated computer resource, receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record is retrieved 
by the addressee; 
(b) if the addressee has not designated a computer resource along with specified timings, if any, 
receipt occurs when the electronic record enters the computer resource of the addressee. 
(3) Save as otherwise agreed to between the originator and the addressee, an electronic record is 
deemed to be despatched at the place where the originator has his place of business, and is deemed to be 
received at the place where the addressee has his place of business. 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply notwithstanding that the place where the computer 
resource is located may be different from the place where the electronic record is deemed to have been 
received under sub-section (3). 
(5) For the purposes of this section,– 
(a) if the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the principal place of 
business, shall be the place of business; 
(b) if the originator or the addressee does not have a place of business, his usual place of 
residence shall be deemed to be the place of business; 
(c) “usual place of residence”, in relation to a body corporate, means the place where it is 
registered. 
CHAPTER V 
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS ANS SECURE 1[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE] 
14. Secure electronic record.–Where any security procedure has been applied to an electronic record 
at a specific point of time, then such record shall he deemed to be a secure electronic record from such 
point of time to the time of verification. 
2[15. Secure electronic signature.– An electronic signature shall be deemed to be a secure electronic 
signature if– 
(i) the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under the exclusive control of 
signatory and no other person; and 
(ii) the signature creation data was stored and affixed in such exclusive manner as may be 
prescribed. 
Explanation.–In case of digital signature, the “signature creation data” means the private key of the 
subscriber. 
16. Security procedures and practices.–The Central Government may, for the purposes of sections 
14 and 15, prescribe the security procedures and practices: 
Provided that in prescribing such security procedures and practices, the Central Government shall 
have regard to the commercial circumstances, nature of transactions and such other related factors as it 
may consider appropriate.] 
CHAPTER VI 
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES 
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers.–(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Controller of Certifying Authorities for the purposes of this 
Act and may also by the same or subsequent notification appoint such number of Deputy Controllers 
3[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees]  as it deems fit. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signatures” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by s 11, ibid., for sections 15 and 16 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by s.12, ibid., for “and Assistant Controllers” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

13 
 
(2) The Controller shall discharge his functions under this Act subject to the general control and 
directions of the Central Government. 
(3) The Deputy Controllers and Assistant Controllers shall perform the functions assigned to them by 
the Controller under the general superintendence and control of the Controller. 
(4) The qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller, Deputy 
Controllers 1[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government. 
(5) The Head Office and Branch Office of the office of the Controller shall be at such places as the 
Central Government may specify, and these may be established at such places as the Central Government 
may think fit. 
(6) There shall be a seal of the Office of the Controller. 
18. Functions of Controller.–The Controller may perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely:– 
(a) exercising supervision over the activities of the Certifying Authorities; 
(b) certifying public keys of the Certifying Authorities; 
(c) laying down the standards to be maintained by the Certifying Authorities; 
(d) specifying the qualifications and experience which employees of the Certifying Authority 
should possess; 
(e) specifying the conditions subject to which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their 
business; 
(f) specifying the contents of written, printed or visual materials and advertisements that may be 
distributed or used in respect of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the public key; 
(g) specifying the form and content of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the key; 
(h) specifying the form and manner in which accounts shall be maintained by the Certifying 
Authorities; 
(i) specifying the terms and conditions subject to which auditors may be appointed and the 
remuneration to be paid to them; 
(j) facilitating the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying Authority either solely 
or jointly with other Certifying Authorities and regulation of such systems; 
(k) specifying the manner in which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their dealings with the 
subscribers; 
(l) resolving any conflict of interests between the Certifying Authorities and the subscribers; 
(m) laying down the duties of the Certifying Authorities; 
(n) maintaining a data base containing the disclosure record of every Certifying Authority 
containing such particulars as may be specified by regulations, which shall be accessible to public. 
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities.–(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be specified by regulations, the Controller may with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, and by notification in the Official Gazette, recognise any foreign Certifying Authority as a 
Certifying Authority for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Where any Certifying Authority is recognised under sub-section (1), the 2[electronic signature] 
Certificate issued by such Certifying Authority shall be valid for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) The Controller may, if he is satisfied that any Certifying Authority has contravened any of the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which it was granted recognition under sub-section (1) he may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification in the Official Gazette, revoke such recognition.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 12, for “Assistant Controllers” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

14 
 
20. [Controller to act as repository.] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 
(10 of 2009), s. 13 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
21. Licence to issue 1[electronic signature] Certificates.–(1) Subject to the provisions of                     
sub-section (2), any person may make an application, to the Controller, for a licence to issue 1[electronic 
signature] Certificates. 
(2) No licence shall be issued under sub-section (1), unless the applicant fulfills such requirements 
with respect to qualification, expertise, manpower, financial resources and other infrastructure facilities, 
which arc necessary to issue 1[electronic signature] Certificates as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(3) A licence granted under this section shall– 
(a) be valid for such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government; 
(b) not be transferable or heritable; 
(c) be subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations. 
22. Application for licence.–(1) Every application for issue of a licence shall be in such form as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) Every application for issue of a licence shall be accompanied by– 
(a) a certification practice statement; 
(b) a statement including the procedures with respect to identification of the applicant; 
(c) payment of such fees, not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government; 
(d) such other documents, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
23. Renewal of licence.–An application for renewal of a licence shall be– 
(a) in such form; 
(b) accompanied by such fees, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government and shall be made not less than forty-five days before the date of expiry of the 
period of validity of the licence. 
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence.–The Controller may, on receipt of an application 
under sub-section (1) of section 21, after considering the documents accompanying the application and 
such other factors, as he deems fit, grant the licence or reject the application: 
Provided that no application shall be rejected under this section unless the applicant has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of presenting his case. 
25. Suspension of licence.– (1) The Controller may, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry, as he 
may think fit, that a Certifying Authority has– 
(a) made a statement in, or in relation to, the application for the issue or renewal of the licence, 
which is incorrect or false in material particulars; 
(b) failed to comply with the terms and conditions subject to which the licence was granted; 
2[(c) failed to maintain the procedures and standards specified in section 30;] 
(d) contravened any provisions of this Act, rule, regulation or order made thereunder, 
revoke the licence: 
Provided that no licence shall be revoked unless the Certifying Authority has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed revocation. 
(2) The Controller may, if he has reasonable cause to believe that there is any ground for revoking a 
licence under sub-section (1), by order suspend such licence pending the completion of any enquiry 
ordered by him: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19-9-2002). 

15 
 
Provided that no licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding ten days unless the Certifying 
Authority has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed suspension. 
(3) No Certifying Authority whose licence has been suspended shall issue any 1[electronic signature] 
Certificate during such suspension. 
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence.–(1) Where the licence of the Certifying Authority 
is suspended or revoked, the Controller shall publish notice of such suspension or revocation, as the case 
may be, in the data base maintained by him. 
(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Controller shall publish notices of such 
suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories: 
Provided that the data base containing the notice of such suspension or revocation, as the case may 
be, shall be made available through a web site which shall be accessible round the clock: 
Provided further that the Controller may, if he considers necessary, publicise the contents of data base 
in such electronic or other media, as he may consider appropriate. 
27. Power to delegate.–The Controller may, in writing, authorise the Deputy Controller, Assistant 
Controller or any officer to exercise any of the powers of the Controller under this Chapter. 
28. Power to investigate contraventions.–(1) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in this 
behalf shall take up for investigation any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations 
made thereunder. 
(2) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall exercise the like powers which 
are conferred on Income-tax authorities under Chapter XIII of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), and 
shall exercise such powers, subject to such limitations laid down under that Act. 
29. Access to computers and data.–(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) of 
section 69, the Controller or any person authorised by him shall, if he has reasonable cause to suspect that 
2[any contravention of the provisions of this Chapter] has been committed, have access to any computer 
system, any apparatus, data or any other material connected with such system, for the purpose of 
searching or causing a search to be made for obtaining any information or data contained in or available 
to such computer system. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Controller or any person authorised by him may, by order, 
direct any person in charge of, or otherwise concerned with the operation of, the computer system, data 
apparatus or material, to provide him with such reasonable technical and other assistance as he may 
consider necessary. 
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures.–Every Certifying Authority shall,– 
(a) make use of hardware, software and procedures that are secure from intrusion and misuse; 
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability in its services which are reasonably suited to the 
performance of intended functions; 
(c) adhere to security procedures to ensure that the secrecy and privacy of the 1[electronic 
signatures] are assured; 3*** 
4[(ca) be the repository of all electronic signature Certificates issued under this Act; 
(cb) publish information regarding its practices, electronic signature Certificates and current 
status of such certificates; and ] 
(d) observe such other standards as may be specified by regulations. 
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc.–Every Certifying Authority shall 
ensure that every person employed or otherwise engaged by it complies, in the course of his employment 
or engagement, with the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and orders made thereunder. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder”                
(w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
3. The word “and” omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
4. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  

16 
 
32. Display of licence.–Every Certifying Authority shall display its licence at a conspicuous place of 
the premises in which it carries on its business. 
33. Surrender of licence.–(1) Every Certifying Authority whose licence is suspended or revoked 
shall immediately after such suspension or revocation, surrender the licence to the Controller. 
(2) Where any Certifying Authority fails to surrender a licence under sub-section (1), the person in 
whose favour a licence is issued, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 1[liable to penalty which may 
extend to five lakh rupees]. 
34. Disclosure.–(1) Every Certifying Authority shall disclose in the manner specified by regulations– 
(a) its 2[electronic signature] Certificate 3***; 
(b) any certification practice statement relevant thereto; 
(c) notice of the revocation or suspension of its Certifying Authority certificate, if any; and 
(d) any other fact that materially and adversely affects either the reliability of a 2[electronic signature] 
Certificate, which that Authority has issued, or the Authority's ability to perform its services. 
(2) Where in the opinion of the Certifying Authority any event has occurred or any situation has 
arisen which may materially and adversely affect the integrity of its computer system or the conditions 
subject to which a 2[electronic signature] Certificate was granted, then, the Certifying Authority shall– 
(a) use reasonable efforts to notify any person who is likely to be affected by that occurrence; or 
(b) act in accordance with the procedure specified in its certification practice statement to deal 
with such event or situation. 
CHAPTERVII 
2[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE] CERTIFICATES 
35. Certifying authority to issue 2[electronic signature] Certificate.–(1) Any person may make an 
application to the Certifying Authority for the issue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by such fee not exceeding twenty-five thousand 
rupees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be paid to the Certifying Authority: 
Provided that while prescribing fees under sub-section (2) different fees may be prescribed for 
different classes of applicants. 
(3) Every such application shall be accompanied by a certification practice statement or where there is 
no such statement, a statement containing such particulars, as may be specified by regulations. 
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Certifying Authority may, after 
consideration of the certification practice statement or the other statement under sub-section (3) and after 
making such enquiries as it may deem fit, grant the 2[electronic signature] Certificate or for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, reject the application: 
4*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
5[Provided] that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed rejection. 
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital Signature Certificate.–A Certifying Authority while 
issuing a Digital Signature Certificate shall certify that– 
(a) it has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder; 
(b) it has published the Digital Signature Certificate or otherwise made it available to such person 
relying on it and the subscriber has accepted it; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for certain words (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Certain words omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
4. The first proviso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “Provided further” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

17 
 
(c) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key, listed in the Digital 
Signature Certificate; 
1[(ca) the subscriber holds a private key which is capable of creating a digital signature; 
(cb) the public key to be listed in the certificate can be used to verify a digital signature affixed by 
the private key held by the subscriber;] 
(d) the subscriber's public key and private key constitute a functioning key pair; 
(e) the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate is accurate; and 
(f) it has no knowledge of any material fact, which if it had been included in the Digital Signature 
Certificate would adversely affect the reliability of the representations in clauses (a) to (d). 
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate.–(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the 
Certifying Authority which has issued a Digital Signature Certificate may suspend such Digital Signature 
Certificate,– 
(a) on receipt of a request to that effect from– 
(i) the subscriber listed in the Digital Signature Certificate; or 
(ii) any person duly authorised to act on behalf of that subscriber; 
(b) if it is of opinion that the Digital Signature Certificate should be suspended in public interest. 
(2) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be suspended for a period exceeding fifteen days unless 
the subscriber has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(3) On suspension of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the subscriber. 
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate.–(1) A Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital 
Signature Certificate issued by it– 
(a) where the subscriber or any other person authorised by him makes a request to that effect; or 
(b) upon the death of the subscriber; or 
(c) upon the dissolution of the firm or winding up of the company where the subscriber is a firm 
or a company. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) and without prejudice to the provisions of                     
sub-section (1), a Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate which has been issued 
by it at any time, if it is of opinion that– 
(a) a material fact represented in the Digital Signature Certificate is false or has been concealed; 
(b) a requirement for issuance of the Digital Signature Certificate was not satisfied; 
(c) the Certifying Authority's private key or security system was compromised in a manner 
materially affecting the Digital Signature Certificate's reliability; 
(d) the subscriber has been declared insolvent or dead or where a subscriber is a firm or a 
company, which has been dissolved, wound-up or otherwise ceased to exist. 
(3) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be revoked unless the subscriber has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(4) On revocation of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the subscriber. 
39. Notice of suspension or revocation.–(1) Where a Digital Signature Certificate is suspended or 
revoked under section 37 or section 38, the Certifying Authority shall publish a notice of such suspension 
or revocation, as the case may be, in the repository specified in the Digital Signature Certificate for 
publication of such notice. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 18 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

18 
 
(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Certifying Authority shall publish notices of 
such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories. 
CHAPTER VIII 
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS 
40. Generating key pair.–Where any Digital Signature Certificate the public key of which 
corresponds to the private key of that subscriber which is to be listed in the Digital Signature Certificate 
has been accepted by a subscriber, 1*** the subscriber shall generate 2[that key] pair by applying the 
security procedure. 
3[40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.–In respect of Electronic Signature 
Certificate the subscriber shall perform such duties as may be prescribed.] 
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate.–(1) A subscriber shall be deemed to have accepted 
a Digital Signature Certificate if he publishes or authorises the publication of a Digital Signature 
Certificate– 
(a) to one or more persons; 
(b) in a repository; or 
otherwise demonstrates his approval of the Digital Signature Certificate in any manner. 
(2) By accepting a Digital Signature Certificate the subscriber certifies to all who reasonably rely on 
the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate that– 
(a) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital 
Signature Certificate and is entitled to hold the same; 
(b) all representations made by the subscriber to the Certifying Authority and all material relevant 
to the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate are true; 
(c) all information in the Digital Signature Certificate that is within the knowledge of the 
subscriber is true. 
42. Control of private key.–(1) Every subscriber shall exercise reasonable care to retain control of 
the private key corresponding to the public key listed in his Digital Signature Certificate and take all steps 
to prevent its disclosure 4***. 
(2) If the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate has 
been compromised, then, the subscriber shall communicate the same without any delay to the Certifying 
Authority in such manner as may be specified by the regulations. 
Explanation.–For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the subscriber shall be liable till he 
has informed the Certifying Authority that the private key has been compromised. 
CHAPTER IX 
5[PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION] 
43. 6[Penalty and compensation] for damage to computer, computer system, etc.–If any person 
without permission of the owner or any other person who is in charge of a computer, computer system or 
computer network,– 
(a)  accesses  or  secures  access  to  such  computer,  computer system   or computer  network 
7[or computer resource]; 
                                                           
1. The word “then” omitted by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19-9-2002). 
2. Subs. ibid., for “the key” (w.e.f. 19-9-2002). 
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 19 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
4. The words “to a person not authorised to affix the digital signature of the subscriber” omitted by notification No. S.O.1015(E) 
(w.e.f. 19-9-2002). 
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 20, for “PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “Penalty” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
7. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

19 
 
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base or information from such 
computer, computer system or computer network including information or data held or stored in any 
removable storage medium; 
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant or computer virus into any 
computer, computer system or computer network; 
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer system or computer network, data, 
computer data base or any other programmes residing in such computer, computer system or 
computer network; 
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer system or computer network; 
(f) denies or causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any computer, 
computer system or computer network by any means; 
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a computer, computer system or 
computer network in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made 
thereunder; 
(h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by tampering with 
or manipulating any computer, computer system, or computer network; 
1[(i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource or diminishes its 
value or utility or affects it injuriously by any means; 
(j) steal, conceal, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any 
computer source code used for a computer resource with an intention to cause damage;] 
2[he shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.] 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,– 
(i) “computer contaminant” means any set of computer instructions that are designed– 
(a) to modify, destroy, record, transmit data or programme residing within a computer, 
computer system or computer network; or 
(b) by any means to usurp the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or 
computer network; 
(ii) “computer data-base” means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or 
instructions in text, image, audio, video that are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised 
manner or have been produced by a computer, computer system or computer network and are 
intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network; 
(iii) “computer virus” means any computer instruction, information, data or programme that 
destroys, damages, degrades or adversely affects the performance of a computer resource or attaches 
itself to another computer resource and operates when a programme, data or instruction is executed or 
some other event takes place in that computer resource; 
(iv) “damage” means to destroy, alter, delete, add, modify or rearrange any computer resource by 
any means. 
1[(v) “computer source code” means the listing of programme, computer commands, design and 
layout and programme analysis of computer resource in any form.] 
3[43A. Compensation for failure to protect data.–Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or 
handling any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls or 
operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and 
thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay 
damages by way of compensation to the person so affected. 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

20 
 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,– 
(i) “body corporate” means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship or other 
association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities; 
(ii) “reasonable security practices and procedures” means security practices and procedures 
designed to protect such information from unauthorised access, damage, use, modification, disclosure 
or impairment, as may be specified in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in any 
law for the time being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable 
security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with such professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit; 
(iii) “sensitive personal data or information” means such personal information as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or associations as 
it may deem fit.] 
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.–If any person who is required under this 
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder to– 
 
(a) furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the Certifying Authority fails to 
furnish the same, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding 1[fifteen lakh] rupees for each such 
failure; 
(b) file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents within the time specified 
therefor in the regulations fails to file return or furnish the same within the time specified therefor in 
the regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding 2[fifty thousand] rupees for every day 
during which such failure continues; 
(c) maintain books of account or records, fails to maintain the same, he shall be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding 3[one lakh] rupees for every day during which the failure continues. 
45. Residuary penalty.–Whoever contravenes any 4[rules, regulations, directions or orders] made 
under this Act, for the contravention of which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be liable to 
pay a 5[penalty not exceeding one lakh rupees, in addition to compensation to the person affected by such 
contravention not exceeding— 
(a) ten lakh rupees, by an intermediary, company or body corporate; or 
(b) one lakh rupees, by any other person.] 
46. Power to adjudicate.–(1) For the purpose of adjudging 6[under this Act] whether any person has 
committed a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, 7[direction or 
order made thereunder which renders him liable to pay penalty or compensation,] the Central Government 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), appoint any officer not below the rank of a Director to 
the Government of India or an equivalent officer of a State Government to be an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry in the manner prescribed by the Central Government. 
8[(1A) The adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall exercise jurisdiction to 
adjudicate matters in which the claim for 9*** damage does not exceed rupees five crore: 
Provided that the jurisdiction in respect of the claim for 9*** damage exceeding rupees five crores 
shall vest with the competent court.] 
(2) The adjudicating officer shall, after giving the person referred to in sub-section (1) a reasonable 
opportunity for making representation in the matter and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for “one lakh and fifty thousand” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
2. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “five thousand” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
3. Sub. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “ten thousand” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
4. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “rules or regulations” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
5. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 30-11-2023).  
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “under this Chapter” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
7. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23, for “direction or order made thereunder” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
8. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
9. Words omitted “injury or” omitted by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 30-11-2023).  

21 
 
has committed the contravention, he may impose such penalty or award such compensation as he thinks 
fit in accordance with the provisions of that section. 
(3) No person shall be appointed as an adjudicating officer unless he possesses such experience in the 
field of Information Technology and legal or judicial experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(4) Where more than one adjudicating officers are appointed, the Central Government shall specify by 
order the matters and places with respect to which such officers shall exercise their jurisdiction. 
(5) Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which are conferred on the                     
1[Appellate Tribunal] under sub-section (2) of section 58, and– 
(a) all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(b) shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974); 
2[(c) shall be deemed to be a civil court for purposes of Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code, 
1908 (5 of 1908).] 
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer.–While adjudging the quantum of 
compensation under this Chapter, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the following factors, 
namely:– 
(a) the amount of gain of unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a result of the default; 
(b) the amount of loss caused to any person as a result of the default; 
(c) the repetitive nature of the default. 
CHAPTER X 
3[APPELLATE TRIBUNAL] 
48. Establishment of 1[Appellate Tribunal].–4[(1) The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal established under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 shall, on 
and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, be the Appellate 
Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.] 
(2) The Central Government 5[shall specify, by notification] the matters and places in relation to 
which the 1[Appellate Tribunal] may exercise jurisdiction. 
49. [Composition of Cyber Appellate Tribunal.]—Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017),           
s.  169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
50. [Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson and Members of Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal.]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
51. [Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members.]—Omitted by s. 
169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
52. [Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and 
Members.]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
52A. [Powers of superintendence, direction, etc.]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
52B. [Distribution of business among Benches.]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
52C. [Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
52D. Decision by majority.–If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in opinion 
on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson of the 1[Appellate Tribunal] who shall hear the point or points himself and such point or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017) 
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for Chapter heading (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
4. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
5. Subs. by s, 169, ibid., for “shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub-section (1)” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 

22 
 
points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it.] 
 53. [Filling up of vacancies.]—Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s.  169 (w.e.f. 26-5-
2017). 
 54. [Resignation and removal.]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
 55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.–No 
order of the Central Government appointing any person as the 1[Chairperson or the Member] of a                     
2[Appellate Tribunal] shall be called in question in any manner and no act or proceeding before a  
2[Appellate Tribunal] shall be called in question in any manner on the ground merely of any defect in the 
constitution of a 2[Appellate Tribunal]. 
 56. [Staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.]—Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169 
(w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
57. Appeal to 2[Appellate Tribunal].–(1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), any person aggrieved 
by an order made by controller or an adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to a 
2[Appellate Tribunal] having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(2) No appeal shall lie to the 2[Appellate Tribunal] from an order made by an adjudicating officer 
with the consent of the parties. 
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the Controller or the adjudicating officer is received by the person 
aggrieved and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the 2[Appellate Tribunal] may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the 2[Appellate Tribunal] may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against. 
(5) The 2[Appellate Tribunal] shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal 
and to the concerned Controller or adjudicating officer. 
(6) The appeal filed before the 2[Appellate Tribunal] under sub-section (1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six 
months from the date of receipt of the appeal. 
58. Procedure and powers of the 2[Appellate Tribunal].–(1) The 2[Appellate Tribunal] shall not be 
bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided 
by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the                 
2[Appellate Tribunal] shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it shall 
have its sittings. 
(2) The 2[Appellate Tribunal] shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:– 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other electronic records; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
(e) reviewing its decisions; 
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte; 
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 29, ibid., for “Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s, 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 

23 
 
(3) Every proceeding before the 1[Appellate Tribunal] shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) and the 1[Appellate Tribunal] shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
59. Right to legal representation.–The appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or 
more legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the 1[Appellate Tribunal]. 
60. Limitation.–The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, as far as may be, 
apply to an appeal made to the 1[Appellate Tribunal]. 
61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.–No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Act or the 
1[Appellate Tribunal] constituted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. 
62. Appeal to High Court.–Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the 1[Appellate 
Tribunal] may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the 1[Appellate Tribunal] to him on any question of fact or law arising out of such 
order: 
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days. 
63. Compounding of contraventions.–(1) Any contravention under this 2[Act] may, either before or 
after the institution of adjudication proceedings, be compounded by the Controller or such other officer as 
may be specially authorised by him in this behalf or by the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, 
subject to such conditions as the Controller or such other officer or the adjudicating officer may specify: 
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the penalty which may 
be imposed under this Act for the contravention so compounded. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a person who commits the same or similar contravention 
within a period of three years from the date on which the first contravention, committed by him, was 
compounded. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent contravention 
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the contravention was 
previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first contravention. 
(3) Where any contravention has been compounded under sub-section (1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the person guilty of such contravention in respect of 
the contravention so compounded. 
64. Recovery of 3[penalty or compensation].–A 4[penalty imposed or compensation awarded] under 
this Act, if it is not paid, shall he recovered as an arrear of land revenue and the licence or the 5[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be suspended till the penalty is paid. 
CHAPTER XI 
OFFENCES 
65. Tampering with computer source documents.–Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals, 
destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal, destroy, or alter any computer 
source code used for a computer, computer programme, computer system or computer network, when the 
computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may extend up to two lakh rupees, or 
with both. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19-9-2002). 
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 31, for marginal heading (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “penalty imposed” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

24 
 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, “computer source code” means the listing of 
programmes, computer commands, design and layout and programme analysis of computer resource in 
any form. 
1[66. Computer related offences.–If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to 
in section 43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,– 
(a) the word “dishonestly” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860); 
(b) the word “fraudulently” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 25 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860). 
266A. [Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc.]– 
Omitted by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 (18 of 2023), s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 
30-11-2023). 
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device.– 
Whoever dishonestly received or retains any stolen computer resource or communication device knowing 
or having reason to believe the same to be stolen computer resource or communication device, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with fine 
which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both. 
66C. Punishment for identity theft.–Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make use of the 
electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other person, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall 
also be liable to fine which may extend to rupees one lakh. 
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource.–Whoever, by means 
of any communication device or computer resource cheats by personating, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy.–Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes 
or transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances 
violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years 
or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section– 
(a) “transmit” means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that it be viewed by a 
person or persons; 
(b) “capture”, with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film or record by any 
means; 
(c) “private area” means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area, buttocks or female 
breast: 
(d) “publishes” means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and making it available for 
public; 
(e) “under circumstances violating privacy” means circumstances in which a person can have a 
reasonable expectation that– 
(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an image of his private 
area was being captured; or 
(ii) any part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public, regardless of whether 
that person is in a public or private place. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 32, for sections 66 and 67 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Section 66A has been struck down by supreme Court’s Order dated 24-3-2015 in the Shreya Singhal Vs. Union of India, AIR 
2015 SC. 1523. 
 

25 
 
 
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism.–(1) Whoever,– 
(A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or to strike terror in 
the people or any section of the people by– 
(i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person authorised to access computer 
resource; or 
(ii) attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without authorisation or exceeding 
authorised access; or 
(iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminant, and by means of such 
conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to persons or damage to or destruction of 
property or disrupts or knowing that it is likely to cause damage or disruption of supplies or 
services essential to the life of the community or adversely affect the critical information 
infrastructure specified under section 70; or 
(B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or accesses a computer resource without authorisation 
or exceeding authorised access, and by means of such conduct obtains access to information, data or 
computer data base that is restricted for reasons of the security of the State or foreign relations; or any 
restricted information, data or computer data base, with reasons to believe that such information, data 
or computer data base so obtained may be used to cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, 
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an 
offence, or to the advantage of any foreign nation, group of individuals or otherwise, 
commits the offence of cyber terrorism. 
(2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to imprisonment for life. 
67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form.–Whoever 
publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form, any material which 
is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt 
persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter 
contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the 
event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., 
in electronic form.–Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the 
electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and with 
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also with fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually 
explicit act, etc., in electronic form.–Whoever,– 
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted material in any electronic form 
which depicts children engaged in sexually explicit act or conduct; or 
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads, advertises, promotes, 
exchanges or distributes material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or indecent or 
sexually explicit manner; or 
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship with one or more children for and 
on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer resource; 
or 
(d) facilitates abusing children online, or 

26 
 
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to sexually explicit act 
with children, 
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also 
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees: 
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not extend to any book, 
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representation or figure in electronic form– 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the 
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representation or figure is the 
interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern; or 
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide heritage or religious purposes. 
Explanation–For the purposes of this section, “children” means a person who has not completed 
the age of 18 years. 
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries.–(1) Intermediary shall 
preserve and retain such information as may be specified for such duration and in such manner and format 
as the Central Government may prescribe. 
(2) any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) 
shall be 1[liable to penalty which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees].] 
68. Power of Controller to give directions.–(1) The Controller may, by order, direct a Certifying 
Authority or any employee of such Authority to take such measures or cease carrying on such activities as 
specified in the order if those are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act, rules or 
any regulations made thereunder. 
2[(2) Any person who intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under sub-section (1) 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable 1[to penalty which may extend to twenty-five lakh              
rupees].] 
3[69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information 
through any computer resource.–(1) Where the Central Government or a State Government or any of 
its officers specially authorised by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
in this behalf may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the interest of the sovereignty 
or integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public 
order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above or for 
investigation of any offence, it may subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, by order, direct any agency of the appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or 
cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or 
stored in any computer resource. 
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such interception or monitoring or decryption may 
be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in-charge of the computer resource shall, when 
called upon by any agency referred to in sub-section (1), extend all facilities and technical assistance to– 
(a) provide access to or secure access to the computer resource generating, transmitting, receiving 
or storing such information; or 
(b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, as the case may be; or 
(c) provide information stored in computer resource. 
(4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency referred to in sub-
section (3) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for certain words (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 33, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for section 69 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

27 
 
69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any 
computer resource.–(1) Where the Central Government or any of its officers specially authorised by it in 
this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the interest of sovereignty and integrity 
of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for 
preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above, it may subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (2), for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of the 
Government or intermediary to block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the 
public any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in any computer resource. 
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such blocking for access by the public may be 
carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(3) The intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub-section (1) shall be 
punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and also be liable to fine. 
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any 
computer resource for cyber security.–(1) The Central Government may, to enhance cyber security and 
for identification, analysis and prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant in the country, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise any agency of the Government to monitor and collect 
traffic data or information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource. 
(2) The intermediary or any person in-charge or the computer resource shall, when called upon by the 
agency which has been authorised under sub-section (1), provide technical assistance and extend all 
facilities to such agency to enable online access or to secure and provide online access to the computer 
resource generating, transmitting, receiving or storing such traffic data or information. 
(3) The procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information, shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
(4) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2) 
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which any extend to 1[one year or shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both]. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,– 
(i) “computer contaminant” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 43; 
(ii) “traffic data” means any data identifying or purporting to identify any person, computer 
system or computer network or location to or from which the communication is or may be 
transmitted and includes communications origin, destination, route, time, data, size, duration or 
type of underlying service and any other information.] 
70. Protected system.–2[(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects the facility of Critical 
Information Infrastructure, to be a protected system. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, “Critical Information Infrastructure” means the 
computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall have debilitating impact on national 
security, economy, public health or safety.] 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by order in writing, authorise the persons who are authorised to 
access protected systems notified under sub-section (1). 
(3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected system in contravention 
of the provisions of this section shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine. 
3[(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security practices and procedures for 
such protected system.] 
4[70A. National nodal agency.–(1) The Central Government may, by notification published in the 
Official Gazette, designate any organisation of the Government as the national nodal agency in respect of 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for “three years and shall also be liable to fine” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 35, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
4. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

28 
 
(2) The national nodal agency designated under sub-section (1) shall be responsible for all measures 
including Research and Development relating to protection of Critical Information Infrastructure. 
(3) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident 
response.–(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an agency of 
the Government to be called the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team. 
(2) The Central Government shall provide the agency referred to in sub-section (1) with a Director 
General and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed. 
(3) The salary and allowances and terms and conditions of the Director-General and other officers and 
employees shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national agency for 
performing the following functions in the area of cyber security,– 
(a) collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents; 
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents; 
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents; 
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities; 
(e) issue guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes and white papers relating to information 
security practices, procedures, preventation, response and reporting of cyber incidents; 
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed. 
(5) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 
(6) For carrying out the provisions of sub-section (4), the agency referred to in sub-section (1) may 
call for information and give direction to the service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body 
corporate and any other person. 
(7) Any service provider, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate or person who fails to provide 
the information called for or comply with the direction under sub-section (6), shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to 1[one crore] 
rupees or with both. 
(8) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except on a complaint made by 
an officer authorised in this behalf by the agency referred to in sub-section (1).] 
71. Penalty for misrepresentation.–Whoever makes any misrepresentation to, or suppresses any 
material fact from the Controller or the Certifying Authority for obtaining any licence or 2[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy.–Save as otherwise provided in this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force, if any person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred 
under this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any electronic record, book, 
register, correspondence, information, document or other material without the consent of the person 
concerned discloses such electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or 
other material to any other person shall be 3[liable to penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees]. 
4[72A. 5[Penalty] for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract.–Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person including an intermediary 
who, while providing services under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for “one lakh” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for certain world (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 37, (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for “Punishment” (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 

29 
 
containing personal information about another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely 
to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in 
breach of a lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be 1[liable to penalty which may 
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees].] 
73. Penalty for publishing 2[electronic signature] Certificate false in certain particulars.–(1) No 
person shall publish a 2[electronic signature] Certificate or otherwise make it available to any other person 
with the knowledge that– 
(a) the Certifying Authority listed in the certificate has not issued it; or 
(b) the subscriber listed in the certificate has not accepted it; or 
(c) the certificate has been revoked or suspended,  
unless such publication is for the purpose of verifying a 2[electronic signature] created prior to such 
suspension or revocation. 
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose.–Whoever knowingly creates, publishes or otherwise makes 
available a 2[electronic signature] Certificate for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.–(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention 
committed outside India by any person irrespective of his nationality. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), this Act shall apply to an offence or contravention committed 
outside India by any person if the act or conduct constituting the offence or contravention involves a 
computer, computer system or computer network located in India. 
76. Confiscation.–Any computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any other 
accessories related thereto, in respect of which any provision of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made 
thereunder has been or is being contravened, shall be liable to confiscation: 
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudicating the confiscation that 
the person in whose possession, power or control of any such computer, computer system, floppies, 
compact disks, tape drives or any other accessories relating thereto is found is not responsible for the 
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder, the court may, 
instead of making an order for confiscation of such computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks, 
tape drives or any other accessories related thereto, make such other order authorised by this Act against 
the person contravening of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder as it 
may think fit. 
3[77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment.–No 
compensation awarded, penalty imposed or confiscation made under this Act shall prevent the award of 
compensation or imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in 
force. 
77A. Compounding of offences.–A court of competent jurisdiction may compound offences, other 
than offences for which the punishment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years has 
been provided, under this Act: 
Provided that the court shall not compound such offence where the accused is, by reason of his 
previous conviction, liable to either enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for certain word (w.e.f. 30-11-2023). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for section 77 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

30 
 
Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence affects the socio 
economic conditions of the country or has been committed against a child below the age of 18 years or a 
woman. 
(2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for compounding in the 
court in which offence is pending for trial and the provisions of sections 265B and 265C of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply. 
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable.–Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offence punishable with imprisonment of three 
years and above shall be cognizable and the offence punishable with imprisonment of three years shall be 
bailable.] 
78. Power to investigate offences.–Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a police officer not below the rank of 1[Inspector] shall investigate any 
offence under this Act. 
2[CHAPTER XII 
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES 
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases.–(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in force but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), 
an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or communication link made 
available or hosted by him. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if– 
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a communication system 
over which information made available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; 
or 
(b) the intermediary does not– 
(i) initiate the transmission, 
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and 
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission; 
(c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act and also 
observes such other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if– 
(a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats or promise 
or otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act; 
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate Government or its 
agency that any information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer 
resource controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary 
fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource without vitiating the 
evidence in any manner. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, the expression “third party information” means any 
information dealt with by an intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary. 
CHAPTER XIIA 
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE 
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence.–The Central Government 
may, for the purposes of providing expert opinion on electronic form evidence before any court or other 
authority specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, any Department, body or agency of the Central 
Government or a State Government as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 39, for “Deputy Superintendent of Police” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by, s. 40, ibid., for Chapter XII (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

31 
 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, “electronic form evidence” means any information of 
probative value that is either stored or transmitted in electronic form and includes computer evidence, 
digital audio, digital video, cell phones, digital fax machines.] 
CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc.–(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any police officer, not below the rank of a 
1[Inspector], or any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf may enter any public place and search and arrest without warrant any 
person found therein who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being 
about to commit any offence under this Act. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “public place” includes any public 
conveyance, any hotel, any shop or any other place intended for use by, or accessible to the public. 
(2) Where any person is arrested under sub-section (1) by an officer other than a police officer, such 
officer shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested before a magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case or before the officer-in-charge of a police station. 
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, subject to the 
provisions of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to any entry, search or arrest, made under 
this section. 
81. Act to have overriding effect.–The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
2[Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall restrict any person from exercising any right 
conferred under the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of 1957) or the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970).] 
3[81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque.–(1) The provisions of 
this Act, for the time being in force, shall apply to, or in relation to, electronic cheques and the truncated 
cheques subject to such modifications and amendments as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) by the Central Government, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not 
be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that notification. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this Act, the expressions “electronic cheque” and “truncated 
cheque” shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in section 6 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 
1881 (26 of 1881).] 
4[82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants.–The 
Controller, the Deputy Controller and the Assistant Controllers shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 
83. Power to give directions.–The Central Government may give directions to any State Government 
as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation 
or order made thereunder. 
84. Protection of action taken in good faith.–No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government, the State Government, the Controller or any person acting on behalf of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 41, for “Deputy Superintendent of Police” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Ins. by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 13 (w.e.f. 26-2-2003). 
4. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s. 169, for section 82 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 

32 
 
him, 1[and adjudicating officers] for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder. 
2[84A. Modes or methods for encryption.–The Central Government may, for secure use of the 
electronic medium and for promotion of e-governance and e-commerce, prescribe the modes or methods 
for encryption. 
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences.–Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence under this Act. 
Explanation.–An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which 
constitutes the abetment. 
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences.–Whoever attempts to commit an offence 
punishable by this Act or causes such an offence to be committed, and in such an attempt does any act 
towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made for the punishment of 
such attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term 
which may extend to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such 
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.] 
85. Offences by companies.–(1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to punishment 
if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent such contravention. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,– 
(i) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
86. Removal of difficulties.–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
87. Power of Central Government to make rules.–(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette and in the Electronic Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “the Chairperson Members, adjudicating officers and the staff of the Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
2. Ins. by 10 of 2009, s. 45 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

33 
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:– 
1[(a) the conditions for considering reliability of electronic signature or electronic authentication 
technique under sub-section (2) of section 3A; 
(aa) the procedure for ascertaining electronic signature or authentication under sub-section (3) of 
section 3A; 
(ab) the manner in which any information or matter may be authenticated by means of electronic 
signature under section 5;] 
(b) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant or payment shall be effected under sub-section 
(1) of section 6; 
(c) the manner and format in which electronic records shall be filed, or issued and the method of 
payment under sub-section (2) of section 6; 
2[(ca) the manner in which the authorised service provider may collect, retain and appropriate 
service charges under sub-section (2) of section 6A;] 
(d) the matters relating to the type of 3[electronic signature], manner and format in which it may 
be affixed under section 10; 
4[(e) the manner of storing and affixing electronic signature creation data under section 15; 
(ea) the security procedures and practices under section 16;] 
(f) the qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller, Deputy 
Controllers 5[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] under section 17; 
6* 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
(h) the requirements which an applicant must fulfil under sub-section (2) of section 21; 
(i) the period of validity of licence granted under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 21; 
(j) the form in which an application for licence may be made under sub-section (1) of section 22; 
(k) the amount of fees payable under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 22; 
(l) such other documents which shall accompany an application for licence under clause (d) of 
sub-section (2) of section 22; 
(m) the form and the fee for renewal of a licence and the fee payable thereof under section 23; 
 2[(ma) the form of application and fee for issue of Electronic Signature Certificate under  
section 35;] 
(n) the form in which application for issue of a 3[electronic signature] Certificate may be made 
under sub-section (1) of section 35; 
(o) the fee to be paid to the Certifying Authority for issue of a 3[electronic signature] Certificate 
under sub-section (2) of section 35; 
2[(oa) the duties of subscribers under section 40A; 
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information 
under section 43A;] 
(p) the manner in which the adjudicating officer shall hold inquiry under sub-section (1) of 
section 46; 
(q) the qualification and experience which the adjudicating officer shall possess under sub-section 
(3) of section 46; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Ins. by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
4. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause (e) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
5. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for “and Assistant Controllers” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
6. Clause (g) omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

34 
 
1* 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 (u) the form in which appeal may be filed and the fee thereof under sub-section (3) of section 57; 
(v) any other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of 
section 58; and 
2[(w) the powers and functions of the Chairperson of the 3[Appellate Tribunal] under  
section 52A; 
(x) the information, duration, manner and form of such information to be retained and preserved 
under section 67C; 
(y) the procedures and safeguards for interception, monitoring or decryption under sub-section (2) 
of section 69A; 
(z) the procedures and safeguards for blocking for access by the public under sub-section (3) of 
section 69 B; 
(za) the procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information under 
sub-section (3) of section 69B; 
(zb) the information security practices and procedures for protected system under section 70; 
(zc) manner of performing functions and duties of the agency under sub-section (3) of  
 section 70 A; 
(zd) the officers and employees under sub-section (2) of section 70B; 
(ze) salaries and allowances and terms and conditions of service of the Director General and other 
officers and employees under sub-section (3) of section 70B; 
(zf) the manner in which the functions and duties of agency shall be performed under sub-section 
(5) of section 70B; 
(zg) the guidelines to be observed by the intermediaries under sub-section (2) of section 79; 
(zh) the modes or methods for encryption under section 84 A.] 
(3) 4[Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-section (1)  of section 70A and 
every rule made by it] shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 5*** the rule or both 
Houses agree that 5*** the rule should not be made, 5*** the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or 
rule. 
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee.–(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Cyber Regulations Advisory 
Committee. 
(2) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of 
other official and non-official members representing the interests principally affected or having special 
knowledge of the subject-matter as the Central Government may deem fit. 
(3) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall advise– 
(a) the Central Government either generally as regards any rules or for any other purpose 
connected with this Act; 
(b) the Controller in framing the regulations under this Act. 
                                                           
1. Clauses (r), (s) and (t) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46, for clause (w) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal”(w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46, for certain words, brackets, letter and figures (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
5. The words “the notification or” omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

35 
 
(4) There shall be paid to the non-official members of such Committee such travelling and other 
allowances as the Central Government may fix. 
89. Power of Controller to make regulations.–(1) The Controller may, after consultation with the 
Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee and with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:– 
(a) the particulars relating to maintenance of data base containing the disclosure record of every 
Certifying Authority under clause 1[(n)] of section 18; 
(b) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Controller may recognise any foreign 
Certifying Authority under sub-section (1) of section 19; 
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which a licence may be granted under clause (c) of             
sub-section (3) of section 21; 
(d) other standards to be observed by a Certifying Authority under clause (d) of section 30; 
(e) the manner in which the Certifying Authority shall disclose the matters specified in                     
sub-section (1) of section 34; 
(f) the particulars of statement which shall accompany an application under sub-section (3) of 
section 35. 
(g) the manner by which the subscriber shall communicate the compromise of private key to the 
Certifying Authority under sub-section (2) of section 42. 
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation. 
90. Power of State Government to make rules.–(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:– 
(a) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment shall be effected under 
sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(b) for matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 6; 
2* 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the Stale Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
91. [Amendment of Act 45 of 1860.]—Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 
(10 of 2009), s. 48 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
92. [Amendment of Act 1 of 1872.]—Omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
93. [Amendment of Act 18 of 1891.]—Omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
94. [Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.]—Omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E), for “(m)” (w.e.f. 19-9-2002). 
2. Clause (c) omitted by Act 10 of 2009, s. 47 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

36 
 
1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sub-section (4) of section 1] 
DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE ACT SHALL NOT APPLY 
Sl. No. 
Description of documents or transactions 
2[1. 
A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque, a Demand Promissory Note or a Bill of 
Exchange issued in favour of or endorsed by an entity regulated by the Reserve Bank of India, 
National Housing Bank, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority) as 
defined in Section 13 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 (26 of 1881).] 
2. 
A power-of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882 (7 of 1882) 
3[but excluding those power-of-attorney that empower an entity regulated by the Reserve Bank 
of India, National Housing Bank, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority of India and Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority to act for, on behalf of, and in the name of the person executing them.]. 
3. 
A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882). 
4. 
A will as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), 
including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name called. 
5. 
4[***] 
______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 49, for the First Schedule and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by notification No S.O. 4720(E), for serial number 1 and the entries relating thereto, Dated 26-9-2022. 
3. Ins. by S.O. 4720(E), Dated 26-9-2022. 
4. Serial number 5 and the entries relating thereto Omitted by S.O. 4720(E), Dated 26-9-2022. 

37 
 
 
1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sub-section (1) of section 3A] 
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE OR ELECTRONIC AUTHENTICATION TECHNIQUE AND PROCEDURE 
Sl. No. 
Description 
Procedure 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
2[1. 
e-authentication technique using Aadhaar 3[or 
other] e-KYC services 
Authentication of an electronic record 
by e-authentication Technique which 
shall be done by— 
(a) 
the 
applicable 
use 
of 
e-
authentication, hash, and asymmetric 
crypto system techniques, leading to 
issuance of Digital Signature Certificate 
by Certifying Authority 
(b) a trusted third party service by 
subscriber's key pair-generation, storing 
of key pairs 4[* * *] and creation of 
digital signature provided that the 
trusted third party shall be offered by 
the certifying authority. The trusted 
third party shall send application form 
and certificate signing request to the 
Certifying Authority for issuing a 
Digital Signature Certificate to the 
subscriber. 
(c) 
Issuance 
of 
Digital 
Signature 
Certificate by Certifying Authority shall 
be based on e-authentication, particulars 
specified in Form C of Schedule IV of 
the Information Technology (Certifying 
Authorities) 
Rules, 
2000, 
digitally 
signed 
verified 
information 
from 
Aadhaar 5[or other] e-KYC services and 
electronic consent of Digital Signature 
Certificate applicant. 
(d) The manner and requirements for e-
authentication shall be as issued by the 
Controller from time to time. 
(e) The security procedure for creating 
the subscriber’s key pair 6[and other e-
KYC services] shall be in accordance 
with the e-authentication guidelines 
issued by the Controller. 
(f) The standards referred to in Rule 6 of 
the Information Technology (Certifying 
Authorities) Rules, 2000 shall be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 49, (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 61(E), dated 27-1-2015 (w.e.f. 28-1-2015). 
3. Ins. by S.O. 1119(E), dated 1-3-2019. 
4. The words “on hardware security module” omitted by G.S.R. 539(E), dt. 30-6-2015 (w.e.f. 6-7-2015). 
5. Ins. by S.O. 1119(E), dated 1-3-2019. 
6. Ins. by S.O. 1119(E), dated 1-3-2019. 

38 
 
complied with, in so far as they relate to 
the certification function of public key 
of 
Digital 
Signature 
Certificate 
applicant. 
1[(g) 
The 
manner 
in 
which 
the 
information is authenticated by means 
of digital signature shall comply with 
the manner and standards specified in 
Rules 3 to 12 of the Digital Signature 
(End entity) Rules, 2015 in so far as 
they relate to the creation, storage, and 
verification of Digital Signature] 
2[2. 
e-authentication technique and procedure for 
creating and accessing subscriber’s signature 
key facilitated by trusted third party 
Authentication of an electronic record 
by e-authentication technique which 
shall be done by— 
(a) 
the 
applicable 
use 
of  
e-authentication, hash and asymmetric 
crypto system techniques leading to 
issuance of Digital Signature Certificate 
by Certifying Authority, provided that 
Certifying Authority shall ensure the 
subscriber identity verification, secure 
storage of the keys by trusted third party 
and subscriber’s sole authentication 
control to the signature key. 
(b) Identity verification of Digital 
Signature Certificate applicant shall be 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
Identity 
Verification 
Guidelines 
issued 
by 
Controller from time-to-time. 
(c) The requirement to operate as trusted 
third party shall be specified under e-
authentication guidelines issued by the 
Controller. 
(d) a trusted third party shall 
(i) facilitate Identity verification of 
Digital Signature Certificate applicant; 
(ii) establish secure storage for 
subscriber to have sole control for 
creation and subsequent usage of 
subscriber’s signature key by sole 
authentication of subscriber; 
(iii) facilitate key pair-generation, 
secure storage of subscriber's signature 
key and facilitate signature creation 
functions; 
(vi) facilitate the submission of DSC 
application form and certificate signing 
request to the Certifying Authority for 
issuing a Digital Signature Certificate to 
the DSC applicant, and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 446(E), for “(g)” dated 27-4-2016 (w.e.f. 27-4-2016).” 
2. Ins. by S.O. 3472(E), dated 29-9-2020. 

39 
 
(v) facilitate revocation of Digital 
Signature Certificate and destruction of 
subscriber’s signature key. 
(e) The manner and requirements for 
authentication and storage of keys shall 
be as issued by the Controller from time 
to 
time 
under 
e-authentication 
guidelines 
(g) The security procedure for creating 
the subscriber's key pair shall be in 
accordance with the e-authentication 
guidelines issued by the Controller. 
(h) The standards referred to in Rule 6 
of 
the 
Information 
Technology 
(Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000 
shall be complied with, in so far as they 
relate to the certification function of 
public 
key 
of 
Digital 
Signature 
Certificate applicant. 
(i) The manner in which information is 
authenticated by means of digital 
signature shall comply with the manner 
and standards specified in Rule 3 to 12 
of Digital Signature (End entity) Rules, 
2015 in so far as they relate to the 
creation, storage and verification of 
Digital Signature.] 
_______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
[THE THIRD SCHEDULE.] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (10 of 
2009), s. 50 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (10 of 
2009), s. 50 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
 


================================================================================
  📄 Motor Vehicles Act.pdf
     Pages: 175
================================================================================
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988  
(ACT NO. 59 OF 1988) 
[As on the 21st May, 2025] 
 
 

2 
 
LIST OF AMENDING ACTS 
1. The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994 (54 of 1994). 
2. The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2000 (27 of 2000). 
3. The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2001 (39 of 2001). 
4. The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2015 (3 of 2015). 
5. The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 (32 of 2019). 
6. The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 (18 of 2023). 
 
 
_______ 
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED 
Cl., cls.              . 
. 
. 
.            .            for            Clause, clauses. 
Ins.                 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.            ,,               Inserted. 
Notifn.  
. 
. 
. 
. 
.  
,, 
    Notification. 
S., ss.  
. 
. 
. 
. 
.  
,, 
    Section, sections. 
Sch. 
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.  
,, 
    Schedule. 
Subs. 
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.  
,, 
    Substituted. 
w.e.f.  
. 
. 
. 
. 
.  
,, 
    with effect from. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
 2A. e-cart and e-rickshaw. 
 2B. Promotion of innovation. 
CHAPTER II 
LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
3. Necessity for driving licence. 
4. Age limit in connection with driving of motor vehicles. 
5. Responsibility of owners of motor vehicles for contravention of sections 3 and 4. 
6. Restrictions on the holding of driving licences. 
7. Restrictions on the granting of learner’s licences for certain vehicles. 
8. Grant of learner’s licence. 
9. Grant of driving licence. 
10. Form and contents of licences to drive. 
11. Additions to driving licence. 
12. Licensing and regulation of schools or establishments for imparting instruction in driving of motor 
vehicles. 
13. Extent of effectiveness of licences, to drive motor vehicles. 
14. Currency of licences to drive motor vehicles. 
15. Renewal of driving licences. 
16. Revocation of driving licence on grounds of disease or disability. 
17. Orders refusing or revoking driving licences and appeals therefrom. 
18. Driving Licences to drive motor vehicles, belonging to the Central Government. 
19. Power of licensing authority to disqualify from holding a driving licence or revoke such licence. 
20. Power of Court to disqualify. 
21. Suspension of driving licence in certain cases. 
22. Suspension or cancellation of driving licence on conviction. 
23. Effect of disqualification order. 
24. Endorsement. 
25. Transfer of endorsement and issue of driving licence free from endorsement. 
25A. National Register of Driving Licences. 
26. Maintenance of State Registers of Driving Licences. 
27. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
28. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER III 
LICENSING OF CONDUCTORS OF STAGE CARRIAGES 
SECTIONS 
29. Necessity for conductor’s licence. 
30. Grant of conductor’s licence. 
31. Disqualifications for the grant of conductor’s licence. 
32. Revocation of a conductor’s licence on grounds of disease or disability. 
33. Orders refusing, etc., conductor’s licences and appeals therefrom. 
34. Power of licensing authority to disqualify. 
35. Power of Court to disqualify. 
36. Certain provisions of Chapter II to apply to conductor’s licence. 
37. Savings. 
38. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
39. Necessity for registration. 
40. Registration, where to be made. 
41. Registration, how to be made. 
42. Special provision for registration of motor vehicles of diplomatic officers, etc. 
43. Temporary registration. 
44. Production of vehicle at the time of registration. 
45. Refusal of registration or renewal of the certificate of registration. 
46. Effectiveness in India of registration. 
47. Assignment of new registration mark on removal to another State. 
48. No objection certificate. 
49. Change of residence or place of business. 
50. Transfer of ownership. 
51. Special provisions regarding motor vehicle subject to hire-purchase agreement, etc. 
52. Alteration in motor vehicle. 
53. Suspension of registration. 
54. Cancellation of registration suspended under section 53. 
55. Cancellation of registration. 
56. Certificate of fitness of transport vehicles. 
57. Appeals. 
58. Special provisions in regard to transport vehicles. 
59. Power to fix the age limit of motor vehicle. 
60. Registration of vehicles belonging to the Central Government. 
61. Application of Chapter to trailers. 
62. Information regarding stolen and recovered motor vehicles to be furnished by the police to the 
State Transport Authority. 
62A. Prohibition of registration and issuance of certificate of fitness to oversized vehicles. 
62B. National Register of Motor Vehicles. 
63. Maintenance of State Registers of Motor Vehicles. 
64. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
65. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 

5 
 
CHAPTER V 
CONTROL OF TRANSPORT VEHICLES 
SECTIONS 
66. Necessity for permits. 
66A. National Transportation Policy. 
66B. No bar against permit holders to apply and hold licences under schemes. 
67. Power to State Government to control road transport. 
68. Transport Authorities. 
69. General provision as to applications for permits. 
70. Application for stage carriage permit. 
71. Procedure of Regional Transport Authority in considering application for stage carriage permit. 
72. Grant of stage carriage permits. 
73. Application for contract carriage permit. 
74. Grant of contract carriage permit. 
75. Scheme for renting of motor cabs. 
76. Application for private service vehicle permit. 
77. Application for goods carriage permit. 
78. Consideration of application for goods carriage permit. 
79. Grant of goods carriage permit. 
80. Procedure in applying for and granting permits. 
81. Duration and renewal of permits. 
82. Transfer of permit. 
83. Replacement of vehicles. 
84. General conditions attaching to all permits. 
85. General form of permits. 
86. Cancellation and suspension of permits. 
87. Temporary permits. 
88. Validation of permits for use outside region in which granted. 
88A. Power of Central Government to make schemes for national, multimodal and inter-State 
transport of passengers and goods. 
89. Appeals. 
90. Revision. 
91. Restriction of hours of work of drivers. 
92. Voidance of contracts restrictive of liability. 
93. Agent or canvasser or aggregator to obtain licence. 
94. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts. 
95. Power of State Government to make rules as to stage carriages and contract carriages. 
96. Power of State Government to make rules for the purposes of this Chapter. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS 
97. Definition. 
98. Chapter to override Chapter V and other laws. 
99. Preparation and publication of proposal regarding road transport service of a State transport 
undertaking. 
100. Objection to the proposal. 
101. Operation of additional services by a State transport undertaking in certain circumstances. 

6 
 
SECTIONS 
102. Cancellation or modification of scheme. 
103. Issue of permits to State transport undertakings. 
104. Restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route. 
105. Principles and method of determining compensation and payment thereof. 
106. Disposal of article found in vehicles. 
107. Power of State Government to make rules. 
108. Certain powers of State Government exercisable by the Central Government. 
 
CHAPTER VII 
CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
109. General provision regarding construction and maintenance of vehicles. 
110. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
110A. Recall of motor vehicles. 
110B. Type of approval certificate and testing agencies. 
111. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC 
112. Limits of speed. 
113. Limits of weight and limitations on use. 
114. Power to have vehicle weighed. 
115. Power to restrict the use of vehicles. 
116. Power to erect traffic signs. 
117. Parking places and halting stations. 
118. Driving regulations. 
119. Duty to obey traffic signs. 
120. Vehicles with left hand control. 
121. Signals and signalling devices. 
122. Leaving vehicle in dangerous position. 
123. Riding on running board, etc. 
124. Prohibition against travelling without pass or ticket. 
125. Obstruction of driver. 
126. Stationary vehicles. 
127. Removal of motor vehicles abandoned or left unattended on a public place. 
128. Safety measures for drivers and pillion riders. 
129. Wearing of protective headgear. 
130. Duty to produce licence and certificate of registration. 
131. Duty of the driver to take certain precautions at unguarded railway level crossing. 
132. Duty of driver to stop in certain cases. 
133. Duty of owner of motor vehicle to give information. 
134. Duty of driver in case of accident and injury to a person. 
134A. Protection of Good Samaritans. 
135. Schemes to be framed for the investigation of accident cases and wayside amenities, etc. 
136. Inspection of vehicle involved in accident. 
136A. Electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety. 
 

7 
 
 
SECTIONS 
137. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
138. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
MOTOR VEHICLES TEMPORARILY LEAVING OR VISITING INDIA 
139. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
 
CHAPTER X [LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT IN CERTAIN CASES] [Omitted.]. 
140. [Omitted.]. 
141. [Omitted.]. 
142. [Omitted.]. 
143. [Omitted.]. 
144. [Omitted.]. 
CHAPTER XI 
INSURANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS 
145. Definitions. 
146. Necessity for insurance against third party risks. 
147. Requirements of policies and limits of liability. 
148. Validity of policies of insurance issued in reciprocating countries. 
149. Settlement by insurance company and procedure therefor. 
150. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments and awards against persons insured in respect of third party 
risks. 
151. Rights of third party against insurers on insolvency of insured. 
152. Duty to give information as to insurance. 
153. Settlement between insurers and insured persons. 
154. Saving in respect of sections 151, 152 and 153. 
155. Effect of death on certain causes of action. 
156. Effect of certificate of insurance. 
157. Transfer of certificate of insurance. 
158. Production of certain certificates, licence and permit in certain cases. 
159. Information to be given regarding accident. 
160. Duty to furnish particulars of vehicle involved in accident. 
161. Special provisions as to compensation in case of hit and run motor accident. 
162. Scheme for golden hour. 
163. Refund in certain cases of compensation paid under section 161. 
164. Payment of compensation in case of death or grevious hurt, etc. 
164A. Scheme for interim relief for claimants. 
164B. Motor Vehicle Accident Fund. 
164C. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
164D. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
CHAPTER XII 
CLAIMS TRIBUNALS 
SECTIONS 
165. Claims Tribunals. 
166. Application for compensation. 
167. Option regarding claims for compensation in certain cases. 
168. Award of the Claims Tribunal. 
169. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunals. 
170. Impleading insurer in certain cases. 
171. Award of interest where any claim is allowed. 
172. Award of compensatory costs in certain cases. 
173. Appeals. 
174. Recovery of money from insurer as arrear of land revenue. 
175. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts. 
176. Power of State Government to make rules. 
177. General provision for punishment of offences. 
    177A. Penalty for contravention of regulations under section 118. 
 
CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
178. Penalty for travelling without pass or ticket and for dereliction of duty on the part of conductor 
and refusal to ply contract carriage, etc. 
179. Disobedience of orders, obstruction and refusal of information. 
180. Allowing unauthorised persons to drive vehicles. 
181. Driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 or section 4. 
182. Offences relating to licences. 
 182A. Punishment for offences relating to construction, maintenance, sale and alteration of motor           
vehicles and components. 
 182B. Punishment for contravention of section 62A. 
183. Driving at excessive speed, etc. 
184. Driving dangerously. 
185. Driving by a drunken person or by a person under the influence of drugs. 
186. Driving when mentally or physically unfit to drive. 
187. Punishment for offences relating to accident. 
188. Punishment for abetment of certain offences. 
189. Racing and trials of speed. 
190. Using vehicle in unsafe condition. 
191. [Omitted]. 
192.  Using vehicle without registration. 
    192A. Using vehicle without permit. 
    192B. Offences relating to registration. 
193. Punishment of agents, canvassers and aggregators without proper authority. 
194. Driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight. 
    194A. Carriage of excess passengers. 
    194B. Use of safety belts and the seating of children. 

9 
 
SECTIONS 
194C. Penalty for violation of safety measures for motor cycle drivers and pillion riders. 
194D. Penalty for not wearing protective headgear. 
194E. Failure to allow free passage to emergency vehicles. 
194F. Use of horns and silence zones. 
195. [Omitted]. 
196. Driving uninsured vehicle. 
197. Taking vehicle without authority. 
198. Unauthorised interference with vehicle. 
    198A. Failure to comply with standards for road design, construction and maintenance. 
199. Offences by companies. 
    199A. Offences by juveniles. 
    199B. Revision of fines. 
200. Composition of certain offences. 
201. Penalty for causing obstruction to free flow of traffic. 
202. Power to arrest without warrant. 
203. Breath tests. 
204. Laboratory test. 
205. Presumption of unfitness to drive. 
206. Power of police officer to impound document. 
207. Power to detain vehicles used without certificate of registration permit, etc. 
208. Summary disposal of cases. 
209. Restriction on conviction. 
210. Courts to send intimation about conviction. 
    210A. Power of State Government to increase penalties. 
    210B. Penalty for offence committed by an enforcing authority. 
    210C. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
    210D. Power of State Government to make rules. 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
211. Power to levy fee. 
 211A. Use of electronic forms and documents. 
212. Publication, commencement and laying of rules and notifications. 
213. Appointment of motor vehicles officers. 
214. Effect of appeal and revision on orders passed by original authority. 
215. Road Safety Councils and Committees. 
    215A. Power of Central Government and State Government to delegate. 
    215B. National Road Safety Board. 
    215C. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
    215D. Power of State Government to make rules. 
216. Power to remove difficulties. 
217. Repeal and savings. 
    217A. Renewal of permits, driving licences and registration granted under the Motor Vehicles  
            Act, 1939. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. [Omitted]. 

10 
 
THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988 
ACT NO. 59 OF 1988 
[14th October, 1988.] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to motor vehicles. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any reference in 
this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in relation to a State, be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of this Act in that State. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless context otherwise requires,— 
2[(1) “adapted vehicle” means a motor vehicle either specially designed and constructed, or to 
which alterations have been made under sub-section (2) of section 52, for the use of a person 
suffering from any physical defect or disability, and used solely by or for such person; 
(1A) “aggregator” means a digital intermediary or market place for a passenger to connect with a 
driver for the purpose of transportation; 
(1B) “area”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such area as the State Government 
may, having regard to the requirements of that provision, specify by notification in the Official 
Gazette;] 
(2) “articulated vehicle” means a motor vehicle to which a semitrailer is attached; 
(3) “axle weight” means in relation to an axle of a vehicle the total weight transmitted by the 
several wheels attached to that axle to the surface on which the vehicle rests; 
(4) “certificate of registration” means the certificate issued by a competent authority to the effect 
that a motor vehicle has been duly registered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV; 
3[(4A) “community service” means an unpaid work which a person is required to perform as a 
punishment for an offence committed under this Act;] 
(5) “conductor”, in relation to a stage carriage, means a person engaged in collecting fares from 
passengers, regulating their entrance into, or exit from, the stage carriage and performing such other 
functions as may be prescribed; 
(6) “conductor’s licence” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter III 
authorising the person specified therein to act as a conductor; 
(7) “contract carriage” means a motor vehicle which carries a passenger or passengers for hire or 
reward and is engaged under a contract, whether expressed or implied, for the use of such vehicle as a 
whole for the carriage of passengers mentioned therein and entered into by a person with a holder of a 
permit in relation to such vehicle or any person authorised by him in this behalf on a fixed or an 
agreed rate or sum— 
(a) on a time basis, whether or not with reference to any route or distance; or 
(b) from one point to another,  
 
1. 1st July, 1989, vide Notifn. No. S.O. 368(E), dated 22nd May, 1989, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, sec. 3 (ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 2, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

11 
 
and in either case, without stopping to pick up or set down passengers not included in the contract 
anywhere during the journey, and includes— 
(i) a maxicab; and 
(ii) a motor cab notwithstanding that separate fares are charged for its passengers; 
(8) “dealer” includes a person who is engaged— 
1*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(b) in building bodies for attachment to chassis; or 
(c) in the repair of motor vehicles; or 
(d) in the business of hypothecation, leasing or hire-purchase of motor vehicle; 
(9) “driver” includes, in relation to a motor vehicle which is drawn by another motor vehicle, the 
person who acts as a steersman of the drawn vehicle; 
2[(9A) “driver refresher training course” means the course referred to in sub-section (2A) of              
section 19;] 
(10) “driving licence” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter II authorising 
the person specified therein to drive, otherwise than as a learner, a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of 
any specified class or description; 
(11) “educational institution bus” means an omnibus, which is owned by a college, school or other 
educational institution and used solely for the purpose of transporting students or staff of the educational 
institution in connection with any of its activities; 
(12) “fares” includes sums payable for a season ticket or in respect of the hire of a contract carriage; 
2[(12A) “golden hour” means the time period lasting one hour following a traumatic injury during 
which there is highest likelihood of preventing death by providing prompt medical care;] 
(13) “goods” includes live-stock, and anything (other than equipment ordinarily used with the 
vehicle) carried by a vehicle except living persons, but does not include luggage or personal effects 
carried in a motor car or in a trailer attached to a motor car or the personal luggage of passengers 
travelling in the vehicle; 
(14) “goods carriage” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the carriage 
of goods, or any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted when used for the carriage of goods; 
(15) “gross vehicle weight” means in respect of any vehicle the total weight of the vehicle and load 
certified and registered by the registering authority as permissible for that vehicle; 
(16) “heavy goods vehicle” means any goods carriage the gross vehicle weight of which, or a tractor 
or a road-roller the unladen weight of either of which, exceeds 12,000 kilograms; 
(17) “heavy passenger motor vehicle” means any public service vehicle or private service vehicle or 
educational institution bus or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of any of which, or a motor car the 
unladen weight of which, exceeds 12,000 kilograms; 
3*  
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(19) “learner’s licence” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter II 
authorising the person specified therein to drive as a learner, a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of any 
specified class or description; 
 
 
 
1. Sub-clause (a) omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Cl. (18) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

12 
 
(20) “licensing authority” means an authority empowered to issue licences under Chapter II or, as the 
case may be, Chapter III; 
(21) “light motor vehicle” means a transport vehicle or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of either of 
which or a motor car or tractor or road-roller the unladen weight of any of which, does not exceed 1[7500] 
kilograms; 
2[(21A) “manufacturer” means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of motor vehicles;] 
(22) “maxicab” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers, 
but not more than twelve passengers, excluding the driver, for hire or reward; 
(23) “medium goods vehicle” means any goods carriage other than a light motor vehicle or a heavy 
goods vehicle; 
(24) “medium passenger motor vehicle” means any public service vehicle or private service vehicle, 
or educational institution bus other than a motor cycle, 3[adapted vehicle], light motor vehicle or heavy 
passenger motor vehicle; 
(25) “motorcab” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry not more than six 
passengers excluding the driver for hire or reward; 
(26) “motor car” means any motor vehicle other than a transport vehicle, omnibus, road-roller, 
tractor, motor cycle or 3[adapted vehicle]; 
(27) “motor cycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle, inclusive of any detachable side-car having 
an extra wheel, attached to the motor vehicle; 
(28) “motor vehicle” or “vehicle” means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon 
roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and 
includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a trailer; but does not include a vehicle 
running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any other 
enclosed premises or a vehicle having less than four wheels fitted with engine capacity of not exceeding 
4[twenty-five cubic centimetres]; 
(29) “omnibus” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six persons 
excluding the driver; 
(30) “owner” means a person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered, and where such 
person is a minor, the guardian of such minor, and in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a 
hire-purchase, agreement, or an agreement of lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person in 
possession of the vehicle under that agreement; 
(31) “permit” means a permit issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority or an authority 
prescribed in this behalf under this Act authorising the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle; 
(32) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(33) “private service vehicle” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six 
persons excluding the driver and ordinarily used by or on behalf of the owner of such vehicle for the 
purpose of carrying persons for, or in connection with, his trade or business otherwise than for hire or 
reward but does not include a motor vehicle used for public purposes; 
(34) “public place” means a road, street, way or other place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which 
the public have a right of access, and includes any place or stand at which passengers are picked up or set 
down by a stage carriage; 
(35) “public service vehicle” means any motor vehicle used or adapted to be used for the carriage of 
passengers for hire or reward, and includes a maxicab, a motorcab, contract carriage, and stage carriage; 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2, for “6000” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 2, for “invalid carriage” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2, for “thirty-five cubic centimetres” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

13 
 
(36) “registered axle weight” means in respect of the axle of any vehicle, the axle weight certified and 
registered by the registering authority as permissible for that axle; 
(37) “registering authority” means an authority empowered to register motor vehicles under                
Chapter IV; 
(38) “route” means a line of travel which specifies the highway which may be traversed by a motor 
vehicle between one terminus and another; 
1[(38A) “scheme” means a scheme framed under this Act;] 
2[(39) “semi-trailer” means a vehicle not mechanically propelled (other than a trailer), which is 
intended to be connected to a motor vehicle and which is so constructed that a portion of it is              
super-imposed on, and a part of whose weight is borne by, that motor vehicle;] 
(40) “stage carriage” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers 
excluding the driver for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the 
whole journey or for stages of the journey; 
(41) “State Government” in relation to a Union territory means the Administrator thereof appointed 
under article 239 of the Constitution; 
(42) “State transport undertaking” means any undertaking providing road transport service, where 
such undertaking is carried on by,— 
(i) the Central Government or a State Government; 
(ii) any Road Transport Corporation established under section 3 of the Road Transport 
Corporations Act, 1950 (64 of 1950); 
(iii) any municipality or any corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central 
Government or one or more State Governments, or by the Central Government and one or more State 
Governments; 
3[(iv) Zilla Parishad or any other similar local authority.] 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “road transport service” means a service of motor 
vehicles carrying passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward; 
1[(42A) “testing agency” means any entity designated as a testing agency under section 110B;] 
(43) “tourist vehicle” means a contract carriage constructed or adapted and equipped and maintained 
in accordance with such specifications as may be prescribed in this behalf; 
(44) “tractor” means a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry any load (other than 
equipment used for the purpose of propulsion); but excludes a road-roller; 
(45) “traffic signs” includes all signals, warning sign posts, direction posts, markings on the road or 
other devices for the information, guidance or direction of drivers of motor vehicles; 
(46) “trailer” means any vehicle, other than a semi-trailer and a side-car, drawn or intended to be 
drawn by a motor vehicle; 
(47) “transport vehicle” means a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational institution 
bus or a private service vehicle; 
(48) “unladen weight” means the weight of a vehicle or trailer including all equipment ordinarily used 
with the vehicle or trailer when working, but excluding the weight of a driver or attendant; and where 
alternative parts or bodies are used the unladen weight of the vehicle means the weight of the vehicle with 
the heaviest such alternative part or body; 
 
 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2, for cl. (39) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

14 
 
(49) “weight” means the total weight transmitted for the time being by the wheels of a vehicle to the 
surface on which the vehicle rests 1[or moves]. 
2[2A. e-cart and e-rickshaw.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in the proviso to sub-section (1) of 
section 7 and sub-section (10) of section 9, the provisions of this Act shall apply to e-cart and e-rickshaw. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, “e-cart or e-rickshaw” means a special purpose battery powered 
vehicle of power not exceeding 4000 watts, having three wheels for carrying goods or passengers, as the 
case may be, for hire or reward, manufactured, constructed or adapted, equipped and maintained in 
accordance with such specifications, as may be prescribed in this behalf.] 
3[2B. Promotion of innovation.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government, in order to promote innovation, research and 
development in the fields of vehicular engineering, mechanically propelled vehicles and transportation in 
general, the Central Government may exempt certain types of mechanically propelled vehicles from the 
application of the provisions of this Act.] 
CHAPTER II 
LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
3. Necessity for driving licence.—(1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place 
unless he holds an effective driving licence issued to him authorising him to drive the vehicle; and no 
person shall so drive a transport vehicle [other than 4[a motor cab or motor cycle] hired for his own use or 
rented under any scheme made under sub-section (2) of section 75] unless his driving licence specifically 
entitles him so to do. 
(2) The conditions subject to which sub-section (1) shall not apply to a person receiving instructions 
in driving a motor vehicle shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
4. Age limit in connection with driving of motor vehicles.—(1) No person under the age of 
eighteen years shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place: 
Provided that 5[a motor cycle with engine capacity not exceeding 50cc] may be driven in a public 
place by a person after attaining the age of sixteen years. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, no person under the age of twenty years shall drive a 
transport vehicle in any public place. 
(3) No learner’s licence or driving licence shall be issued to any person to drive a vehicle of the class 
to which he has made an application unless he is eligible to drive that class of vehicle under this section.  
5. Responsibility of owners of motor vehicles for contravention of sections 3 and 4.—No owner 
or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or permit any person who does not satisfy the 
provisions of section 3 or section 4 to drive the vehicle. 
6. Restrictions on the holding of driving licences.—(1) No person shall, while he holds any driving 
licence for the time being in force, hold any other driving licence except a learner’s licence or a driving 
licence issued in accordance with the provisions of section 18 or a document authorising, in accordance 
with the rules made under section 139, the person specified therein to drive a motor vehicle. 
(2) No holder of a driving licence or a learner’s licence shall permit it to be used by any other person. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent a licensing authority having the jurisdiction referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 9 from adding to the classes of vehicles which the driving licence authorises the 
holder to drive. 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 3 for “a motor cab” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “a motor cycle without gear” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

15 
 
7. Restrictions on the granting of learner’s licences for certain vehicles.—1[(1) No person shall 
be granted a learner’s licence to drive a transport vehicle unless he has held a driving licence to 
drive a light motor vehicle for at least one year:] 
2[Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to an e-cart or e-rickshaw.] 
(2) No person under the age of eighteen years shall be granted a learner’s licence to drive a motor 
cycle without gear except with the consent in writing of the person having the care of the person desiring 
the learner’s licence. 
8. Grant of learner’s licence.—(1) Any person who is not disqualified under section 4 for driving a 
motor vehicle and who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence 
may, subject to the provisions of section 7, apply to 3[any of the licensing authority in the State]— 
(i) in which he ordinarily resides or carries on business, or 
(ii) in which the school or establishment referred to in section 12 from where he intends to 
receive instruction in driving a motor vehicle is situate, 
for the issue to him of a learner’s licence. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such 
documents 4[with such fee and submit in such manner, including electronic means] as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government. 
(3) Every application 5[to drive a transport vehicle made] under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied 
by a medical certificate in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government and signed by such 
registered medical practitioner, as the State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for this purpose: 
6*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
(4) If, from the application or from the medical certificate referred to in sub-section (3), it appears that 
the applicant is suffering from any disease or disability which is likely to cause the driving by him of a 
motor vehicle of the class which he would be authorised by the learner’s licence applied for to drive to be 
a source of danger to the public or to the passengers, the licensing authority shall refuse to issue the 
learner’s licence: 
Provided that a learner’s licence limited to driving an 7[adapted vehicle] may be issued to the 
applicant, if the licensing authority is satisfied that he is fit to drive such a carriage. 
(5) No learner’s licence shall be issued to any applicant unless he 8[satisfies such conditions] as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(6) When an application has been duly made to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant 
has satisfied such authority of his physical fitness under sub-section (3) and has passed to the satisfaction 
of the licensing authority the test referred to in sub-section (5), the licensing authority shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 7, issue the applicant a learner’s licence unless the applicant is disqualified under 
section 4 for driving a motor vehicle or is for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a 
licence to drive a motor vehicle: 
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a learner’s licence to drive a motor cycle or a light 
motor vehicle notwithstanding that it is not the appropriate licensing authority, if such authority is 
satisfied that there is good reason for the applicant’s inability to apply to the appropriate licensing 
authority. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 5, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 4, for “the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “and with such fee” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. The proviso omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “invalid carriage” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
8. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “passes to the satisfaction of the licensing authority such test” (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

16 
 
1[Provided further that a licencing authority may issue a learner’s licence in electronic form and such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided also that the licensing authority may, before issuing the license, verify the identity of the 
applicant in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.] 
(7) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
rules made in this behalf, exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the rules, any class of persons from the provisions of sub-section (3), or sub-section (5), or 
both. 
(8) Any learner’s licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be effective for driving a motor cycle with or 
without gear. 
9. Grant of driving licence—(1) Any person who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or 
obtaining a driving licence may apply to 2[any licensing authority in the State]— 
(i) in which he ordinarily resides or carries on business, or 
(ii) in which the school or establishment referred to in section 12 from where he is receiving or 
has received instruction in driving a motor vehicle is situated,  
for the issue to him of a driving licence. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such 
fee and such documents as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
3[(3) If the applicant passes such test as may be prescribed by the Central Government, he shall be 
issued the driving licence: 
Provided that no such test shall be necessary where the applicant produces proof to show that— 
(a) (i) the applicant has previously held a driving licence to drive such class of vehicle and that 
the period between the date of expiry of that licence and the date of the application does not exceed 
five years, or 
(ii) the applicant holds or has previously held a driving licence to drive such class of vehicle 
issued under section 18, or 
(iii) the applicant holds a driving licence to drive such class of vehicle issued by a competent 
authority of any country outside India, subject to the condition that the applicant complies with the 
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 8, 
(b) the applicant is not suffering from any disability which is likely to cause the driving by him to 
be a source of danger to the public; and the licensing authority may, for that purpose, require the 
applicant to produce a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 8: 
4[Provided further that a driving licence for driving an adapted vehicle may be issued to the 
applicant, if the licensing authority is satisfied that he is fit to drive such motor vehicle.]] 
(4) Where the application is for a licence to drive a transport vehicle, no such authorisation shall be 
granted to any applicant unless he possesses 5*** a driving certificate issued by a school or establishment 
referred to in section 12. 
6[(5) Where the applicant does not pass the test; he may be permitted to re-appear for the test after a 
period of seven days: 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 7, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 5, for the second proviso (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. The words “such minimum educational qualification as may be prescribed by the Central Government and” omitted by s. 5, 
ibid (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 7, for sub-section (5) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

17 
 
Provided that where the applicant does not pass the test even after three appearances, he shall not be 
qualified to re-appear for such test before the expiry of a period of sixty days from the date of last such 
test 1[and such applicant shall be required to complete a remedial driver training course from any school 
or establishment under section 12].] 
(6) The test of competence to drive shall be carried out in a vehicle of the type to which the 
application refers: 
Provided that a person who passed a test in driving a motor cycle with gear shall be deemed also to 
have passed a test in driving a motor cycle without gear. 
(7) When any application has been duly made to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant 
has satisfied such authority of his competence to drive, the licensing authority shall issue the applicant a 
driving licence unless the applicant is for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence: 
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a driving licence to drive a motor cycle or a light motor 
vehicle notwithstanding that it is not the appropriate licensing authority, if the licensing authority is 
satisfied that there is good and sufficient reason for the applicant’s inability to apply to the appropriate 
licensing authority: 
Provided further that the licensing authority shall not issue a new driving licence to the applicant, if 
he had previously held a driving licence, unless it is satisfied that there is good and sufficient reason for 
his inability to obtain a duplicate copy of his former licence. 
(8) If the licensing authority is satisfied, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, that 
he— 
(a) is a habitual criminal or a habitual drunkard; or 
(b) is a habitual addict to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance within the meaning of the 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985); or 
(c) is a person whose licence to drive any motor vehicle has, at any time earlier, been revoked, 
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, make an order refusing to issue a driving licence to such 
person and any person aggrieved by an order made by a licensing authority under this sub-section may, 
within thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority. 
(9) Any driving licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be effective for driving a motor cycle with or 
without gear. 
2[(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the driving licence to drive e-cart or  
e-rickshaw shall be issued in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.] 
10. Form and contents of licences to drive.—(1) Every learner’s licence and driving licence, except 
a driving licence issued under section 18, shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) A learner’s licence or, as the case may be, driving licence shall also be expressed as entitling the 
holder to drive a motor vehicle of one or more of the following classes, namely:— 
(a) motor cycle without gear; 
(b) motor cycle with gear; 
(c) 3[adapted vehicle]; 
(d) light motor vehicle; 
4[(e) transport vehicle;] 
(i) road-roller; 
(j) motor vehicle of a specified description. 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 6, for “invalid carriage” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 8, for cls. (e) to (h) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994).  

18 
 
11. Additions to driving licence.—(1) Any person holding a driving licence to drive any class or 
description of motor vehicles, who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence to drive any other class or description of motor vehicles, may apply to 1[any licensing authority in 
the State] in which he resides or carries on his business in such form and accompanied by such documents 
and with such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government for the addition of such other class or 
description of motor vehicles to the licence. 
(2) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the Central Government, the provisions of section 9 
shall apply to an application under this section as if the said application were for the grant of a licence 
under that section to drive the class or description of motor vehicles which the applicant desires to be 
added to his licence. 
2[Provided that the licensing authority may, before issuing the license verify the identity of the 
applicant in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.] 
12. Licensing and regulation of schools or establishments for imparting instruction in driving of 
motor vehicles.—(1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of licensing and 
regulating, by the State Governments, schools or establishments (by whatever name called) for imparting 
instruction in driving of motor vehicles and matters connected therewith. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) licensing of such schools or establishments including grant, renewal and revocation of such 
licences; 
(b) supervision of such schools or establishments; 
(c) the form of application and the form of licence and the particulars to be contained therein; 
(d) fee to be paid with the application for such licences; 
(e) conditions subject to which such licences may be granted; 
(f) appeals against the orders of refusal to grant or renew such licences and appeals against the 
orders revoking such licences; 
(g) conditions subject to which a person may establish and maintain any such school or 
establishment for imparting instruction in driving of motor vehicles; 
(h) nature, syllabus and duration of course or courses for efficient instruction in driving any 
motor vehicle; 
(i) apparatus and equipments (including motor vehicles fitted with dual control) required for the 
purpose of imparting such instruction; 
(j) suitability of the premises at which such schools or establishments may be established or 
maintained and facilities to be provided therein; 
(k) qualifications, both educational and professional (including experience), which a person 
imparting instruction in driving a motor vehicle shall possess; 
(l) inspection of such schools and establishments (including the services rendered by them and 
the apparatus, equipments and motor vehicles maintained by them for imparting such instruction); 
(m) maintenance of records by such schools or establishments; 
(n) financial stability of such schools or establishments; 
(o) the driving certificates, if any, to be issued by such schools or establishments and the form in 
which such driving certificates shall be issued and the requirements to be complied with for the 
purposes of issuing such certificates; 
(p) such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
rules made in this behalf, exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 7, for “the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

19 
 
specified in the rules, any class of schools or establishments imparting instruction in driving of motor 
vehicles or matters connected therewith from the provisions of this section. 
(4) A school or establishment imparting instruction in driving of motor vehicles or matters connected 
therewith immediately before the commencement of this Act whether under a licence or not, may 
continue to impart such instruction without a licence issued under this Act for a period of one month from 
such commencement, and if it has made an application for such licence under this Act within the said 
period of one month and such application is in the prescribed form, contains the prescribed particulars and 
is accompanied by the prescribed fee, till the disposal of such application by the licensing authority. 
1[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision, where any school or establishment 
has been accredited by a body notified by the Central Government under any other law for the time being 
in force, any person who has successfully completed a training module at such school or establishment 
covering a particular type of motor vehicle shall be eligible to obtain a driving licence for such type of 
motor vehicle. 
(6) The curriculum of the training module referred to in sub-section (5) and the remedial driver 
training course referred to in sub-section (5) of section 9 shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government and that Government may make rules for the regulation of such schools or 
establishments.] 
13. Extent of effectiveness of licences, to drive motor vehicles.—A learner’s licence or a driving 
licence issued under this Act shall be effective throughout India. 
14. Currency of licences to drive motor vehicles.—(1) A learner’s licence issued under this Act 
shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be effective for a period of six months from the date of 
issue of the licence. 
(2) A driving licence issued or renewed under this Act shall,— 
(a) in the case of a licence to drive a transport vehicle, be effective for a period of 2[five years]: 
3*** 
4[Provided that in the case of licence to drive a transport vehicle carrying goods of dangerous 
or  hazardous nature be effective for a period of 5[three years and renewal thereof shall be subject to 
such conditions as the Central Government may prescribe; and];] 
6[(b) in the case of any other licence, subject to such conditions as the Central Government may 
prescribe, if the person obtaining the licence, either originally or on renewal thereof,— 
(i) has not attained the age of thirty years on the date of issue or, renewal thereof, be effective 
until the date on which such person attains the age of forty years; or 
(ii) has attained the age of thirty years but has not attained the age of fifty years on the date of 
issue or, renewal thereof, be effective for a period of ten years from the date of such issue or 
renewal; or 
(iii) has attained the age of fifty years but has not attained the age of fifty-five years on the 
date of issue or, renewal thereof, be effective until the date on which such person attains the age 
of sixty years; or 
(iv) has attained the age of fifty-five years on the date of issue or as the case may be, renewal 
thereof, be effective for a period of five years from the date of such issue or renewal.] 
7*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
15. Renewal of driving licences.—(1) Any licensing authority may, on application made to it, renew 
a driving licence issued under the provisions of this Act with effect from the date of its expiry: 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-7-2021). 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “three years” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 9 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
7. The proviso omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

20 
 
Provided that in any case where the application for the renewal of a licence is made 1[either one year 
prior to date of its expiry or within one year] after the date of its expiry, the driving licence shall be 
renewed with effect from the date of its renewal: 
Provided further that where the application is for the renewal of a licence to drive a transport vehicle 
or where in any other case the applicant has attained the age of forty years, the same shall be 
accompanied by a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in                 
sub-section (3) of section 8, and the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, 
apply in relation to every such case as they apply in relation to a learner’s licence. 
(2) An application for the renewal of a driving licence shall be made in such form and accompanied 
by such documents as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) Where an application for the renewal of a driving licence is made previous to, or not more than 
2[one year] after the date of its expiry, the fee payable for such renewal shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(4) Where an application for the renewal of a driving licence is made more than 2[one year] after the 
date of its expiry, the fee payable for such renewal shall be such amount as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that the fee referred to in sub-section (3) may be accepted by the licensing authority in 
respect of an application for the renewal of a driving licence made under this sub-section if it is satisfied 
that the applicant was prevented by good and sufficient cause from applying within the time specified in 
sub-section (3): 
Provided further that if the application is made more than 3[one year after the driving licence has 
ceased to be effective, the licensing authority shall] refuse to renew the driving licence, unless the 
applicant undergoes and passes to its satisfaction the test of competence to drive referred to in             
sub-section (3) of section 9. 
(5) Where the application for renewal has been rejected, the fee paid shall be refunded to such extent 
and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(6) Where the authority renewing the driving licence is not the authority which issued the driving 
licence it shall intimate the fact of renewal to the authority which issued the driving licence. 
16. Revocation of driving licence on grounds of disease or disability.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the foregoing sections, any licensing authority may at any time revoke a driving licence or 
may require, as a condition of continuing to hold such driving licence, the holder thereof to produce a 
medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in sub-section (3) of  
section 8, if the licensing authority has reasonable grounds to belive that the holder of the driving licence 
is, by virtue of any disease or disability, unfit to drive a motor vehicle and where the authority revoking a 
driving licence is not the authority which issued the same, it shall intimate the fact of revocation to the 
authority which issued that licence. 
17. Orders refusing or revoking driving licences and appeals therefrom—(1) Where a licensing 
authority refuses to issue any learner’s licence or to issue or renew, or revokes, any driving licence, or 
refuses to add a class or description of motor vehicle to any driving licence, it shall do so by an order 
communicated to the applicant or the holder, as the case may be, giving the reasons in writing for such 
refusal or revocation. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made the order. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 10, for “more than thirty days” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “thirty days” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “five years after the driving licence has ceased to be effective, the licensing authority may”                    
(w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

21 
 
18. Driving licences to drive motor vehicles, belonging to the Central Government.—(1) Such 
authority as may be prescribed by the Central Government may issue driving licence valid throughout 
India to persons who have completed their eighteenth year to drive motor vehicles which are the property 
or for the time being under the exclusive control of the Central Government and are used for Government 
purposes relating to the defence of the country and unconnected with any commercial enterprise. 
(2) A driving licence issued under this section shall specify the class or description of vehicle which 
the holder is entitled to drive and the period for which he is so entitled. 
(3) A driving licence issued under this section shall not entitle the holder to drive any motor vehicle 
except a motor vehicle referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) The authority issuing any driving licence under this section shall, at the request of any State 
Government, furnish such information respecting any person to whom a driving licence is issued as that 
Government may at any time require. 
19. Power of licensing authority to disqualify from holding a driving licence or revoke such 
licence.—(1) If a licensing authority is satisfied, after giving the holder of a driving licence an 
opportunity of being heard, that he— 
(a) is a habitual criminal or a habitual drunkard; or 
(b) is a habitual addict to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance within the meaning of the 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985); or 
(c) is using or has used a motor vehicle in the commission of a cognizable offence; or 
(d) has by his previous conduct as driver of a motor vehicle shown that his driving is likely to be 
attended with danger to the public; or 
(e) has obtained any driving licence or a licence to drive a particular class or description of motor 
vehicle by fraud or misrepresentation; or 
(f) has committed any such act which is likely to cause nuisance or danger to the public, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government, having regard to the objects of this Act; or 
(g) has failed to submit to, or has not passed, the tests referred to in the proviso to sub-section (3) 
of section 22; or 
(h) being a person under the age of eighteen years who has been granted a learner’s licence or a 
driving licence with the consent in writing of the person having the care of the holder of the licence 
and has ceased to be in such care, 
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, make an order— 
(i) disqualifying that person for a specified period for holding or obtaining any driving licence to 
drive all or any classes or descriptions of vehicles specified in the licence; or 
(ii) revoke any such licence. 
1[(1A) Where a licence has been forwarded to the licensing authority under sub-section (4) of                   
section 206, the licensing authority, if satisfied after giving the holder of the driving licence an 
opportunity of being heard, may either discharge the holder of a driving licence or, it may for detailed 
reasons recorded in writing, make an order disqualifying such person from holding or obtaining any 
licence to drive all or any class or description of vehicles specified in the licence— 
(a) for a first offence, for a period of three months; 
(b) for a second or subsequent offence, with revocation of the driving licence of such person: 
Provided that where a driving licence is revoked under this section, the name of the holder of such 
driving licence may be placed in the public domain in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.] 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

22 
 
(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) 1[or sub-section (1A)] is made, the holder of a driving 
licence shall forthwith surrender his driving licence to the licensing authority making the order, if the 
driving licence has not already been surrendered, and the licensing authority shall,— 
(a) if the driving licence is a driving licence issued under this Act, keep it until the 
disqualification has expired or has been removed; or 
(b) if it is not a driving licence issued under this Act, endorse the disqualification upon it and send 
it to the licensing authority by which it was issued; or 
(c) in the case of revocation of any licence, endorse the revocation upon it and if it is not the 
authority which issued the same, intimate the fact of revocation to the authority which issued that 
licence: 
2[Provided that the driving licence shall be returned to the holder at the end of the period of 
disqualification only if he successfully completes the driver refresher training course.] 
3[(2A) The licence holder whose licence has been suspended shall undergo the driver refresher training 
course from a school or establishment licenced and regulated under section 12 or such other agency, as 
may be notified by the Central Government. 
(2B) The nature, syllabus and duration of the driver refresher training course shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.] 
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a licensing authority under sub-section (1) 1[or                 
sub-section (1A)] may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority, 
and such appellate authority shall give notice to the licensing authority and hear either party if so required 
by that party and may pass such order as it thinks fit and an order passed by any such appellate authority 
shall be final. 
20. Power of Court to disqualify.—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act or 
of an offence in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used, the Court by which such person is 
convicted may, subject to the provisions of this Act, in addition to imposing any other punishment 
authorised by law, declare the persons so convicted to be disqualified, for such period as the Court may 
specify, from holding any driving licence to drive all classes or description of vehicles, or any particular 
class or description of such vehicles, as are specified in such licence: 
Provided that in respect of an offence punishable under section 183 no such order shall be made for 
the first or second offence. 
(2) Where a person is convicted of an offence under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 132, 
section 134 or section 185, the Court convicting any person of any such offence shall order the 
disqualification under sub-section (1), and if the offence is relatable to clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 132 or section 134, such disqualification shall be for a period of not less than one month, and if 
the offence is relatable to section 185, such disqualification shall be for a period of not less than six 
months. 
(3) A Court shall, unless for special reasons to be recorded in writing it thinks fit to order otherwise, 
order the disqualification of a person— 
(a) who having been convicted of an offence punishable under section 184 is again convicted of 
an offence punishable under that section, 
(b) who is convicted of an offence punishable under section 189, or 
(c) who is convicted of an offence punishable under section 192: 
Provided that the period of disqualification shall not exceed, in the case referred to in clause (a), five 
years, or, in the case referred to in clause (b), two years or, in the case referred to in clause (c), one year. 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

23 
 
(4) A Court ordering the disqualification of a person convicted of an offence punishable under       
section 184 may direct that such person shall, whether he has previously passed the test of competence to 
drive as referred to in sub-section (3) of section 9 or not, remain disqualified until he has subsequent to 
the making of the order of disqualification passed that test to the satisfaction of the licensing authority. 
(5) The Court to which an appeal would ordinarily lie from any conviction of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub-section (1) may set aside or vary any order of disqualification made under that  
sub-section notwithstanding that no appeal would lie against the conviction as a result of which such 
order of disqualification was made. 
21. Suspension of driving licence in certain cases.—(1) Where, in relation to a person who had 
been previously convicted of an offence punishable under section 184, a case is registered by a police 
officer on the allegation that such person has, by such dangerous driving as is referred to in the said 
section 184, of any class or description of motor vehicle caused the death of, or grievous hurt to, one or 
more persons, the driving licence held by such person shall in relation to such class or description of 
motor vehicle become suspended— 
(a) for a period of six months from the date on which the case is registered, or 
(b) if such person is discharged or acquitted before the expiry of the period aforesaid, until such 
discharge or acquittal, as the case may be. 
(2) Where by virtue of the provisions of sub-section (1), the driving licence held by a person becomes 
suspended, the police officer, by whom the case referred to in sub-section (1) is registered, shall bring 
such suspension to the notice of the Court competent to take cognizance of such offence, and thereupon, 
such Court shall take possession of the driving licence, endorse the suspension thereon and intimate the 
fact of such endorsement to the licensing authority by which the licence was granted or last renewed. 
(3) Where the person referred to in sub-section (1) is acquitted or discharged, the Court shall cancel 
the endorsement on such driving licence with regard to the suspension thereof. 
(4) If a driving licence in relation to a particular class or description of motor vehicles is suspended 
under sub-section (1), the person holding such licence shall be debarred from holding or obtaining any 
licence to drive such particular class or description of motor vehicles so long as the suspension of the 
driving licence remains in force. 
22. Suspension or cancellation of driving licence on conviction.—(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 20 where a person, referred to in sub-section (1) of section 21 is 
convicted of an offence of causing, by such dangerous driving as is referred to in section 184 of any class 
or description of motor vehicle the death of, or grievous hurt to, one or more persons, the Court by which 
such person is convicted may cancel, or suspend for such period as it may think fit, the driving licence 
held by such person in so far as it relates to that class or description of motor vehicle. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 20, if a person, having been 
previously convicted of an offence punishable under section 185 is again convicted of an offence 
punishable under that section, the Court, making such subsequent conviction, shall, by order, cancel the 
driving licence held by such person. 
(3) If a driving licence is cancelled or suspended under this section, the Court shall take the driving 
licence in its custody, endorse the cancellation or, as the case may be, suspension, thereon and send the 
driving licence so endorsed to the authority by which the licence was issued or last renewed and such 
authority shall, on receipt of the licence, keep the licence in its safe custody, and in the case of a 
suspended licence, return the licence to the holder thereof after the expiry of the period of suspension on 
an application made by him for such return: 
Provided that no such licence shall be returned unless the holder thereof has, after the expiry of the 
period of suspension, undergone and passed, to the satisfaction of the licensing authority by which the 
licence was issued or last renewed, a fresh test of competence to drive referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 9 and produced a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 8. 

24 
 
(4) If a licence to drive a particular class or description of motor vehicles is cancelled or suspended 
under this section, the person holding such a licence shall be debarred from holding, or obtaining, any 
licence to drive such particular class or description of motor vehicles so long as the cancellation or 
suspension of the driving licence remains in force. 
23. Effect of disqualification order.—(1) A person in respect of whom any disqualification order is 
made under section 19 or section 20 shall be debarred to the extent and for the period specified in such 
order from holding or obtaining a driving licence and the driving licence, if any, held by such person at 
the date of the order shall cease to be effective to such extent and during such period. 
(2) The operation of a disqualification order made under section 20 shall not be suspended or 
postponed while an appeal is pending against such order or against the conviction as a result of which 
such order is made, unless the appellate court so directs. 
(3) Any person in respect of whom any disqualification order has been made may at any time after the 
expiry of six months from the date of the order apply to the Court or other authority by which the order 
was made, to remove the disqualification; and the Court or authority, as the case may be, may, having 
regard to all the circumstances, either cancel or vary the disqualification order: 
Provided that where the Court or other authority refuses to cancel or vary any disqualification order 
under this section, a second application thereunder shall not be entertained before the expiry of a period 
of three months from the date of such refusal. 
24. Endorsement.—(1) The Court or authority making an order of disqualification shall endorse or 
cause to be endorsed upon the driving licence if any, held by the person disqualified, particulars of the 
order of disqualification and of any conviction of an offence in respect of which an order of 
disqualification is made; and particulars of any cancellation or variation of an order of disqualification 
made under sub-section (3) of section 23 shall be similarly so endorsed. 
(2) A Court by which any person is convicted of an offence under this Act as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government, having regard to the objects of this Act, shall, whether or not a disqualification 
order is made in respect of such conviction, endorse or cause to be endorsed particulars of such 
conviction on any driving licence held by the person convicted. 
(3) Any person accused of an offence prescribed under sub-section (2) shall when attending the Court 
bring with him his driving licence if it is in his possession. 
(4) Where any person is convicted of any offence under this Act and sentenced to imprisonment for a 
period exceeding three months the Court awarding the sentence shall endorse the fact of such sentence 
upon the driving licence of the person concerned and the prosecuting authority shall intimate the fact of 
such endorsement to the authority by which the driving licence was granted or last renewed. 
(5) When the driving licence is endorsed or caused to be endorsed by any Court, such Court shall 
send the particulars of the endorsement to the licensing authority by which the driving licence was 
granted or last renewed. 
(6) Where on an appeal against any conviction or order of a Court, which has been endorsed on a 
driving licence, the appellate court varies or sets aside the conviction or order, the appellate court shall 
inform the licensing authority by which the driving licence was granted or last renewed and such 
authority shall amend or cause to be amended the endorsement. 
25. Transfer of endorsement and issue of driving licence free from endorsement.—(1) An 
endorsement on any driving licence shall be transferred to any new or duplicate driving licence obtained 
by the holder thereof until the holder becomes entitled under the provisions of this section to have a 
driving licence issued to him free from endorsement. 

25 
 
(2) Where a driving licence is required to be endorsed and the driving licence is not in the possession 
of the Court or authority by which the endorsement is to be made, then— 
(a) if the person in respect of whom the endorsement is to be made is at the time the holder of a 
driving licence, he shall produce the driving licence to the Court or authority within five days, or such 
longer time as the Court or authority may fix; or 
(b) if, not being then the holder of a driving licence, he subsequently obtains a driving licence, he 
shall within five days after obtaining the driving licence produce it to the Court or authority, 
and if the driving licence is not produced within the time specified, it shall, on the expiration of such time, 
be of no effect until it is produced for the purpose of endorsement. 
(3) A person whose driving licence has been endorsed shall, if during a continuous period of three 
years after such endorsement no further endorsement has been made against him, be entitled on 
surrendering his driving licence and on payment of a fee of five rupees, to receive a new driving licence 
free from all endorsements: 
Provided that if the endorsement is only in respect of an offence contravening the speed limits 
referred to in section 112, such person shall be entitled to receive a new driving licence free from such 
endorsements on the expiration of one year of the date of the endorsement: 
Provided further that in reckoning the said period of three years and one year, respectively, any period 
during which the said person was disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence shall be excluded. 
1[25A. National Register of Driving Licences.—(1) The Central Government shall maintain a 
National Register of Driving Licences in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) All State Registers of Driving Licences shall be subsumed under the National Register of 
Driving Licences by a date to be notified by the Central Government. 
(3) No driving licence issued, or renewed, under this Act shall be valid unless it has been issued a 
unique driving licence number under the National Register of Driving Licences. 
(4) All State Governments and licensing authorities under this Act shall transmit all information 
including contained data in the State Register of Driving Licences in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(5) The State Governments shall be entitled to access the National Register and update their 
records in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.] 
2[26. Maintenance of State Registers of Driving Licences.— Each State Government shall 
maintain, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government, a register to be known as the 
State Register of Driving Licences, in respect of driving licences issued and renewed by the licensing 
authorities of the State Government, containing particulars, including— 
(a) names and addresses of holders of driving licences; 
(b) licence numbers; 
(c) dates of issue or renewal of licences; 
(d) dates of expiry of licences; 
(e) classes and types of vehicles authorised to be driven; and 
(f) such other particulars as the Central Government may prescribe.] 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

26 
 
27. Power of Central Government to make rules.—The Central Government may make rules— 
1[(a) specifications relating to e-cart and e-rickshaw under sub-section (2) of section 2A;] 
2[(aa)] regarding conditions referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(b) providing for the form in which the application for learner’s licence may be made, the 
information it shall contain and the documents to be submitted with the application referred to in  
sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(c) providing for the form of medical certificate referred to in sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(d) providing for the particulars for the test referred to in sub-section (5) of section 8; 
3[(da) the form and manner in which a licensing authority may issue a learner’s licence under 
sub-section (6) of section 8; 
(db) the manner in which a licensing authority may verify the identity of the applicant under the 
third proviso to sub-section (6) of section 8;] 
(e) providing for the form in which the application for driving licence may be made, the 
information it shall contain and the documents to be submitted with the application referred to in  
sub-section (2) of section 9; 
(f) providing for the particulars regarding test of competence to drive, referred to in                 
sub-section (3) of section 9; 
1[(ff) the manner and the conditions subject to which the driving licence may be issued under  
sub-section (10) of section 9;] 
(g) specifying the minimum educational qualifications of persons to whom licences to drive 
transport vehicles may be issued under this Act and the time within which such qualifications are to 
be acquired by such persons; 
(h) providing for the form and contents of the licences referred to in sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(i) providing for the form and contents of the application referred to in sub-section (1) of  
section 11 and documents to be submitted with the application and the fee to be charged; 
(j) providing for the conditions subject to which section 9 shall apply to an application made 
under section 11; 
3[(ja) the curriculum of training modules and the regulation of schools and establishments under 
sub-section (6) of section 12; 
(jb) the conditions for the renewal of licence to drive transport vehicles carrying goods of 
dangerous or hazardous nature and other motor vehicles under clause (a) and clause (b) of  
sub-section (2) of section 14; 
(jc) the manner in which a licensing authority may verify the identity of the applicant under the 
third proviso to sub-section (2) of section 11;] 
(k) providing for the form and contents of the application referred to in sub-section (1) of               
section 15 and the documents to accompany such application under sub-section (2) of section 15; 
 
 
 
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
2. Cl. (a) renumbered as cl. (aa) thereof by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

27 
 
 (l) providing for the authority to grant licences under sub-section (1) of section 18; 
(m) specifying the fees payable under sub-section (2) of section 8, sub-section (2) of section 9 and 
sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 15 for the grant of learner’s licences, and for the grant and renewal 
of driving licences and licences for the purpose of regulating the schools or establishment for 
imparting instructions in driving motor vehicles; 
(n) specifying the acts for the purposes of clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 19; 
1[(na) the manner of placing in the public domain of the name of the licence holder as referred to 
in sub-section (1A) of section 19; 
(nb) providing for the nature, syllabus and duration of the driver refresher training course as 
referred to in sub-section (2B) of section 19;] 
(o) specifying the offences under this Act for the purposes of sub-section (2) of section 24; 
1[(oa) all or any of the matters referred to in section 25A;] 
(p) to provide for all or any of the matters referred to in 2*** section 26; 
(q) any other matter which is, or has to be, prescribed by the Central Government. 
28. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in  
section 27. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licensing authorities and other 
prescribed authorities; 
(b) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees: 
Provided that no fee so fixed shall exceed twenty-five rupees; 
(c) the issue of duplicate licences to replace licences lost, destroyed or mutilated, the replacement 
of photographs which have become obsolete and the fees to be charged therefor; 
(d) the badges and uniform to be worn by drivers of transport vehicles and the fees to be paid in 
respect of badges; 
(e) the fee payable for the issue of a medical certificate under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(f) the exemption of prescribed persons, or prescribed classes of persons, from payment of all or 
any portion of the fees payable under this Chapter; 
(g) the communication of particulars of licences granted by one licensing authority to other 
licensing authorities; 
(h) the duties, functions and conduct of such persons to whom licences to drive transport vehicles 
are issued; 
(i) the exemption of drivers of road-rollers from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or of 
the rules made thereunder; 
3* 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
* 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. The words, brackets and figure “sub-section (1) of” omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Cl. (j) omitted by s. 15, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

28 
 
CHAPTER III 
LICENSING OF CONDUCTORS OF STAGE CARRIAGES 
29. Necessity for conductor’s licence.—(1) No person shall act as a conductor of a stage carriage 
unless he holds an effective conductor’s licence issued to him authorising him to act as such conductor; 
and no person shall employ or permit any person who is not so licensed to act as a conductor of a stage 
carriage. 
(2) A State Government may prescribe the conditions subject to which sub-section (1) shall not apply 
to a driver of a stage carriage performing the functions of a conductor or to a person employed to act as a 
conductor for a period not exceeding one month. 
30. Grant of conductor’s licence.—(1) Any person who possesses such minimum educational 
qualification as may be prescribed by the State Government and is not disqualified under sub-section (1) 
of section 31 and who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a conductor’s licence 
may apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area in which he ordinarily resides or 
carries on business for the issue to him of a conductor’s licence. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and shall contain such information 
as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every application for a conductor’s licence shall be accompanied by a medical certificate in such 
form as may be prescribed, signed by a registered medical practitioner and shall also be accompanied by 
two clear copies of a recent photograph of the applicant. 
(4) A conductor’s licence issued under this Chapter shall be in such form and contain such particulars 
as may be prescribed and shall be effective throughout the State in which it is issued. 
(5) The fee for a conductor’s licence and for each renewal thereof shall be one-half of that for a 
driving licence. 
31. Disqualifications for the grant of conductor’s licence.—(1) No person under the age of 
eighteen years shall hold, or be granted, a conductor’s licence. 
(2) The licensing authority may refuse to issue a conductor’s licence— 
(a) if the applicant does not possess the minimum educational qualification; 
(b) if the medical certificate produced by the applicant discloses that he is physically unfit to act 
as a conductor; and 
(c) if any previous conductor’s licence held by the applicant was revoked. 
32. Revocation of a conductor’s licence on grounds of disease or disability.—A conductor’s 
licence may at any time be revoked by any licensing authority if that authority has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the holder of the licence is suffering from any disease or disability which is likely to render 
him permanently unfit to hold such a licence and where the authority revoking a conductor’s licence is 
not the authority which issued the same, it shall intimate the fact of such revocation to the authority which 
issued that licence: 
Provided that before revoking any licence, the licensing authority shall give the person holding such 
licence a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
33. Orders refusing, etc., conductor’s licences and appeals therefrom.—(1) Where a licensing 
authority refuses to issue or renew, or revokes any conductor’s licence, it shall do so by an order 
communicated to the applicant or the holder, as the case may be, giving the reasons in writing for such 
refusal or revocation. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made the order. 

29 
 
34. Power of licensing authority to disqualify.—(1) If any licensing authority is of opinion that it is 
necessary to disqualify the holder of a conductor’s licence for holding or obtaining such a licence on 
account of his previous conduct as a conductor, it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order 
disqualifying that person for a specified period, not exceeding one year, for holding or obtaining a 
conductor’s licence: 
Provided that before disqualifying the holder of a licence, the licensing authority shall give the person 
holding such licence a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Upon the issue of any such order, the holder of the conductor’s licence shall forthwith surrender 
the licence to the authority making the order, if the licence has not already been surrendered, and the 
authority shall keep the licence until the disqualification has expired or has been removed. 
(3) Where the authority disqualifying the holder of a conductor’s licence under this section is not the 
authority which issued the licence, it shall intimate the fact of such disqualification to the authority which 
issued the same. 
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made the order. 
35. Power of Court to disqualify.—(1) Where any person holding a conductor’s licence is convicted 
of an offence under this Act, the Court by which such person is convicted may, in addition to imposing 
any other punishment authorised by law, declare the person so convicted to be disqualified for such 
period as the Court may specify for holding a conductor’s licence. 
(2) The Court to which an appeal lies from any conviction of an offence under this Act may set aside 
or vary any order of disqualification made by the Court below, and the Court to which appeals ordinarily 
lie from such Court, may set aside or vary any order of disqualification made by that Court, 
notwithstanding that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made. 
36. Certain provisions of Chapter II to apply to conductor’s licence.—The provisions of  
sub-section (2) of section 6, sections 14, 15 and 23, sub-section (1) of section 24 and section 25 shall, so 
far as may be, apply in relation to a conductor’s licence, as they apply in relation to a driving licence. 
37. Savings.—If any licence to act as a conductor of a stage carriage (by whatever name called) has 
been issued in any State and is effective immediately before the commencement of this Act, it shall 
continue to be effective, notwithstanding such commencement, for the period for which it would have 
been effective, if this Act had not been passed, and every such licence shall be deemed to be a licence 
issued under this Chapter as if this Chapter had been in force on the date on which that licence was 
granted. 
38. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licensing authorities and other 
prescribed authorities under this Chapter; 
(b) the conditions subject to which drivers of stage carriages performing the functions of a 
conductor and persons temporarily employed to act as conductors may be exempted from the 
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 29; 
(c) the minimum educational qualifications of conductors; their duties and functions and the 
conduct of persons to whom conductor’s licences are issued; 
(d) the form of application for conductor’s licences or for renewal of such licences and the 
particulars it may contain; 
(e) the form in which conductor’s licences may be issued or renewed and the particulars it may 
contain; 

30 
 
(f) the issue of duplicate licences to replace licences lost, destroyed or mutilated, the replacement 
of photographs which have become obsolete and the fees to be charged therefor; 
(g) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees: 
Provided that no fee so fixed shall exceed twenty-five rupees; 
(h) the badges and uniform to be worn by conductors of stage carriages and the fees to be paid in 
respect of such badges; 
(i) the grant of the certificates referred to in sub-section (3) of section 30 by registered medical 
practitioners and the form of such certificates; 
(j) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a conductor’s licence issued in 
another State shall be effective in the State; 
(k) the communication of particulars of conductor’s licences from one authority to other 
authorities; and 
(l) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
39. Necessity for registration.—No person shall drive any motor vehicle and no owner of a motor 
vehicle shall cause or permit the vehicle to be driven in any public place or in any other place unless the 
vehicle is registered in accordance with this Chapter and the certificate of registration of the vehicle has 
not been suspended or cancelled and the vehicle carries a registration mark displayed in the prescribed 
manner: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a motor vehicle in possession of a dealer subject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
40. Registration, where to be made.—Subject to the provisions of section 42, section 43 and section 
60, every owner of a motor vehicle shall cause the vehicle to be registered by 1[any registering authority 
in the State] in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the vehicle is normally 
kept. 
41. Registration, how to be made.—(1) An application by or on behalf of the owner of a motor 
vehicle for registration shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such documents, particulars 
and information and shall be made within such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that where a motor vehicle is jointly owned by more persons than one, the application shall 
be made by one of them on behalf of all the owners and such applicant shall be deemed to be the owner of 
the motor vehicle for the purposes of this Act. 
2[Provided further that in the case of a new motor vehicle, the application for registration in the State 
shall be made by the dealer of such motor vehicle, if the new motor vehicle is being registered in the same 
State in which the dealer is situated.] 
(2) An application referred to in sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) The registering authority shall issue 3[a certificate of registration in the name of the owner] in such 
form and containing such particulars and information and in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 16, for “a registering authority” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2021).  
3. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “to the owner of a motor vehicle registered by it a certificate of registration” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

31 
 
(4) In addition to the other particulars required to be included in the certificate of registration, it shall 
also specify the type of the motor vehicle, being a type as the Central Government may, having regard to 
the design, construction and use of the motor vehicle, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
(5) The registering authority shall enter the particulars of the certificate referred to in sub-section (3) 
in a register to be maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(6) The registering authority shall assign to the vehicle, for display thereon, a distinguishing mark            
(in this Act referred to as the registration mark) consisting of one of the groups of such of those letters 
and followed by such letters and figures as are allotted to the State by the Central Government from time 
to time by notification in the Official Gazette, and displayed and shown on the motor vehicle in such form 
and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
1[Provided that in case of a new motor vehicle, the application for the registration of which is made 
under the second proviso to sub-section (1), such motor vehicle shall not be delivered to the owner until 
such registration mark is displayed on the motor vehicle in such form and manner as may prescribed by 
the Central Government.] 
(7) A certificate of registration issued under sub-section (3), whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, in respect of a motor vehicle, 2***, shall, subject to the provisions contained 
in this Act, be valid only for a period of fifteen years from the date of issue of such certificate 1[or for 
such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government] and shall be renewable. 
(8) An application by or on behalf of the owner of a motor vehicle, 2***, for the renewal of a 
certificate of registration shall be made within such period and in such form, containing such particulars 
and information as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(9) An application referred to in sub-section (8) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(10) Subject to the provisions of section 56, the registering authority may, on receipt of an application 
under sub-section (8), renew the certificate of registration 3[for such period, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government] and intimate the fact to the original registering authority, if it is not the original 
registering authority. 
1[Provided that the Central Government may prescribe different period of renewal for different types 
of motor vehicles.] 
4*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 (14) An application for the issue of a duplicate certificate of registration shall be made to the 5[last 
registering authority] in such form, containing such particulars and information along with such fee as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Rajasthan 
Amendment of section 41, Central Act 59 of 1988.—In section 41 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
(Central Act 59 of 1988),- 
(a) in sub-sections (7) and (8), the expression, “other than a transport vehicle,” shall be deleted; 
(b) after sub-section (7) so amended, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
“Provided that in the case of transport vehicles, State Government may require the transport vehicles 
to be re-registered in the manner prescribed, subject to the age limit, if any, prescribed under section 59 of 
the Act.”; and 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. The words “other than a transport vehicle” omitted by s. 17, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
3. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “for a period of five years” (w.e.f. 1-4-2021).  
4. Sub-sections (11), (12), (13) omitted by s. 17, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-7-2021).  
5. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 11, for “original registering authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

32 
 
(c) in sub-section (10) after the words “for a period of five years” and before the words “and 
intimate”, the expression “on payment of all taxes, penalties and interest, if any, levied by the State 
Government” shall be inserted. 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 1 of 2002, s. 2] 
42. Special provision for registration of motor vehicles of diplomatic officers, etc.—(1) Where an 
application for registration of a motor vehicle is made under sub-section (1) of section 41 by or on behalf 
of any diplomatic officer or consular officer, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) 
or sub-section (6) of that section, the registering authority shall register the vehicle in such manner and in 
accordance with such procedure as may be provided by rules made in this behalf by the Central 
Government under sub-section (3) and shall assign to the vehicle for display thereon a special registration 
mark in accordance with the provisions contained in those rules and shall issue a certificate (hereafter in 
this section referred to as the certificate of registration) that the vehicle has been registered under this 
section; and any vehicle so registered shall not, so long as it remains the property of any diplomatic 
officer or consular officer, require to be registered otherwise under this Act. 
(2) If any vehicle registered under this section ceases to be the property of any diplomatic officer or 
consular officer, the certificate of registration issued under this section shall also cease to be effective, 
and the provisions of sections 39 and 40 shall thereupon apply. 
(3) The Central Government may make rules for the registration of motor vehicles belonging to 
diplomatic officers and consular officers regarding the procedure to be followed by the registering 
authority for registering such vehicles, the form in which the certificates of registration of such vehicles 
are to be issued, the manner in which such certificates of registration are to be sent to the owners of the 
vehicles and the special registration marks to be assigned to such vehicles. 
(4) For the purposes of this section, “diplomatic officer” or “consular officer” means any person who 
is recognised as such by the Central Government and if any question arises as to whether a person is or is 
not such an officer, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
1[43. Temporary registration.— Notwithstanding anything contained in section 40, the owner of a 
motor vehicle may apply to any registering authority or other authority as may be prescribed by the State 
Government to have the motor vehicle temporarily registered and such authority shall issue a temporary 
certificate of registration and temporary registration mark in accordance with such rules as may be made 
by the Central Government: 
Provided that the State Government may register a motor vehicle that plies, temporarily, within the 
State and issue a certificate of registration and registration mark for a period of one month in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the State Government.] 
2[44. Production of vehicle at the time of registration.— (1) Subject to such terms and conditions as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf, a motor vehicle sold by an authorised dealer 
shall not require production before a registering authority for the purposes of registration for the first 
time.  
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the State Government, a person in 
whose name a certificate of registration has been issued shall not be required to produce the vehicle 
registered or transferred before a registering authority.] 
 45. Refusal of registration or renewal of the certificate of registration.—The registering authority 
may, by order, refuse to register any motor vehicle, or renew the certificate of registration in respect of a 
motor vehicle (other than a transport vehicle), if in either case, the registering authority has reason to 
believe that it is a stolen motor vehicle or the vehicle is mechanically defective or fails to comply with the 
requirements of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, or if the applicant fails to furnish particulars of 
any previous registration of the vehicle or furnishes inaccurate particulars in the application for 
registration of the vehicle or, as the case may be, for renewal of the certificate or registration thereof and 
the registering authority shall furnish the applicant whose vehicle is refused registration, or whose 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 18, for section 43 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Subs. by, s. 19, ibid., for section 44 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

33 
 
application for renewal of the certificate of registration is refused, a copy of such order, together with the 
reasons for such refusal. 
46. Effectiveness in India of registration.—Subject to the provisions of section 47, a motor vehicle 
registered in accordance with this Chapter in any State shall not require to be registered elsewhere in 
India and a certificate of registration issued or in force under this Act in respect of such vehicle shall be 
effective throughout India. 
47. Assignment of new registration mark on removal to another State.—(1) When a motor 
vehicle registered in one State has been kept in another State, for a period exceeding twelve months, the 
owner of the vehicle shall, within such period and in such form containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, apply to the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the 
vehicle then is, for the assignment of a new registration mark and shall present the certificate of 
registration to that registering authority: 
Provided that an application under this sub-section shall be accompanied— 
(i) by the no objection certificate obtained under section 48, or 
(ii) in a case where no such certificate has been obtained, by— 
(a) the receipt obtained under sub-section (2) of section 48; or 
(b) the postal acknowledgement received by the owner of the vehicle if he has sent an 
application in this behalf by registered post acknowledgement due to the registering authority 
referred to in section 48, 
together with a declaration that he has not received any communication from such authority refusing to 
grant such certificate or requiring him to comply with any direction subject to which such certificate may 
be granted: 
Provided further that, in a case where a motor vehicle is held under a hire-purchase, lease or 
hypothecation agreement, an application under this sub-section shall be accompanied by a no objection 
certificate from the person with whom such agreement has been entered into, and the provisions of 
section 51, so far as may be, regarding obtaining of such certificate from the person with whom such 
agreement has been entered into, shall apply. 
(2) The registering authority, to which application is made under sub-section (1), shall after making 
such verification, as it thinks fit, of the returns, if any, received under section 62, assign the vehicle a 
registration mark as specified in sub-section (6) of section 41 to be displayed and shown thereafter on the 
vehicle and shall enter the mark upon the certificate of registration before returning it to the applicant and 
shall, in communication with the registering authority by whom the vehicle was previously registered, 
arrange for the transfer of the registration of the vehicle from the records of that registering authority to 
its own records. 
(3) Where a motor vehicle is held under a hire-purchase or lease or hypothecation agreement, the 
registering authority shall, after assigning the vehicle a registration mark under sub-section (2), inform the 
person whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the person with whom the 
registered owner has entered into the hire-purchase or lease or hypothecation agreement (by sending to 
such person a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at the address of such person entered in the 
certificate of registration the fact of assignment of the said registration mark). 
(4) A State Government may make rules under section 65 requiring the owner of a motor vehicle not 
registered within the State, which is brought into or is for the time being in the State, to furnish to the 
prescribed authority in the State such information with respect to the motor vehicle and its registration as 
may be prescribed. 
(5) If the owner fails to make an application under sub-section (1) within the period prescribed, the 
registering authority may, having regard to the circumstances of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu 
of any action that may be taken against him under section 177, such amount not exceeding one hundred 
rupees as may be prescribed under sub-section (7): 

34 
 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where the owner fails to pay 
the said amount. 
(6) Where the owner has paid the amount under sub-section (5), no action shall be taken against him 
under section 177. 
(7) For the purposes of sub-section (5), the State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay on the part of the owner in making an application under sub-section (1). 
48. No objection certificate.—(1) The owner of a motor vehicle when applying for the assignment of a 
new registration mark under sub-section (1) of section 47, or where the transfer of a motor vehicle is to be 
effected in a State other than the State of its registration, the transferor of such vehicle when reporting the 
transfer under sub-section (1) of section 50, shall make an application in such form and in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government to the registering authority by which the vehicle was registered for 
the issue of a certificate (hereafter in this section referred to as the no objection certificate), to the effect that 
the registering authority has no objection for assigning a new registration mark to the vehicle or, as the case 
may be, for entering the particulars of the transfer of ownership in the certificate of registration. 
(2) The registering authority shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), issue a receipt in 
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the registering authority may, after making such 
inquiry and requiring the applicant to comply with such directions as it deems fit and within thirty days of the 
receipt thereof, by order in writing, communicate to the applicant that it has granted or refused to grant the no 
objection certificate: 
Provided that a registering authority shall not refuse to grant the no objection certificate unless it has 
recorded in writing the reasons for doing so and a copy of the same has been communicated to the applicant. 
(4) Where within a period of thirty days referred to in sub-section (3), the registering authority does not 
refuse to grant the no objection certificate or does not communicate the refusal to the applicant, the registering 
authority shall be deemed to have granted the no objection certificate. 
(5) Before granting or refusing to grant the no objection certificate, the registering authority shall obtain a 
report in writing from the police that no case relating to the theft of the motor vehicle concerned has been 
reported or is pending, verify whether all the amounts due to Government including road tax in respect of that 
motor vehicle have been paid and take into account such other factors as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
1[(6) The owner of the vehicle shall also inform at the earliest, in writing, the registering authority 
about the theft of his vehicle together with the name of the police station where the theft report was 
lodged, and the registering authority shall take into account such report while disposing of any application 
for no objection certification, registration, transfer of ownership or issue of duplicate registration certificate.] 
49. Change of residence or place of business.—(1) If the owner of a motor vehicle ceases to reside or 
have his place of business at the address recorded in the certificate of registration of the vehicle, he shall, 
within thirty days of any such change of address, intimate in such form accompanied by such documents as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, his new address, to the registering authority by which the 
certificate of registration was issued, or, if the new address is within the jurisdiction of another 2[State, to any 
registering authority in that State], and shall at the same time forward the certificate of registration to the 
registering authority or, as the case may be, to the other registering authority in order that the new address may 
be entered therein. 
3[(1A) The intimation under sub-section (1) may be sent to the appropriate registering authority in 
electronic form along with the electronic form of such documents, including proof of authentication in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.] 
(2) If the owner of a motor vehicle fails to intimate his new address to the concerned registering authority 
within the period specified in sub-section (1), the registering authority may, having regard to the circumstances 
of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu of any action that may be taken against him under                   
section 177 such amount not exceeding 4[five hundred rupees] as may be prescribed under  
sub-section (4): 
 
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 13 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 20, for “registering authority, to that other registering authority” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

35 
 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where he fails to pay the said 
amount. 
(3) Where a person has paid the amount under sub-section (2), no action shall be taken against him 
under section 177. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay in intimating his new address. 
(5) On receipt of intimation under sub-section (1), the registering authority may, after making such 
verification as it may think fit, cause the new address to be entered in the certificate of registration. 
(6) A registering authority other than the original registering authority making any such entry shall 
communicate the altered address to the original registering authority. 
(7) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply where the change of the address recorded in the certificate 
of registration is due to a temporary absence not intended to exceed six months in duration or where the 
motor vehicle is neither used nor removed from the address recorded in the certificate of registration. 
50. Transfer of ownership.—(1) Where the ownership of any motor vehicle registered under this 
Chapter is transferred,— 
(a) the transferor shall,— 
(i) in the case of a vehicle registered within the same State, within fourteen days of the 
transfer, report the fact of transfer, in such form with such documents and in such manner, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction 
the transfer is to be effected and shall simultaneously send a copy of the said report to the 
transferee; and 
(ii) in the case of a vehicle registered outside the State, within forty-five days of the transfer, 
forward to the registering authority referred to in sub-clause (i)— 
(A) the no objection certificate obtained under section 48; or 
(B) in a case where no such certificate has been obtained,— 
(I) the receipt obtained under sub-section (2) of section 48; or 
(II) the postal acknowledgement received by the transferred if he has sent an 
application in this behalf by registered post acknowledgement due to the registering 
authority referred to in section 48, 
together with a declaration that he has not received any communication from such authority 
refusing to grant such certificate or requiring him to comply with any direction subject to which 
such certificate may be granted; 
(b) the transferee shall, within thirty days of the transfer, report the transfer to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the vehicle is 
normally kept, as the case may be, and shall forward the certificate of registration to that registering 
authority together with the prescribed fee and a copy of the report received by him from the transferor 
in order that particulars of the transfer of ownership may be entered in the certificate of registration. 
(2) Where— 
(a) the person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered dies, or 
(b) a motor vehicle has been purchased or acquired at a public auction conducted by, or on behalf 
of, Government, 
the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicle or, as the case may be, who has purchased or 
acquired the motor vehicle, shall make an application for the purpose of transferring the ownership of the 
vehicle in his name, to the registering authority in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of 
business where the vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, in such manner, accompanied with such 
fee, and within such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 

36 
 
(3) If the transferor or the transferee fails to report to the registering authority the fact of transfer 
within the period specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1), as the case may be, or if the 
person who is required to make an application under sub-section (2) (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the other person) fails to make such application within the period prescribed, the registering authority 
may, having regard to the circumstances of the case, require the transferor or the transferee, or the other 
person, as the case may be, to pay, in lieu of any action that may be taken against him under section 177 
such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be prescribed under sub-section (5): 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the transferor or the transferee or the 
other person, as the case may be, where he fails to pay the said amount. 
(4) Where a person has paid the amount under sub-section (3), no action shall be taken against him 
under section 177. 
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (3), a State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay on the part of the transferor or the transferee in reporting the fact of transfer 
of ownership of the motor vehicle or of the other person in making the application under sub-section (2). 
(6) On receipt of a report under sub-section (1), or an application under sub-section (2), the 
registering authority may cause the transfer of ownership to be entered in the certificate of registration. 
(7) A registering authority making any such entry shall communicate the transfer of ownership to the 
transferor and to the original registering authority, if it is not the original registering authority. 
51. Special provisions regarding motor vehicle subject to hire-purchase agreement, etc.—(1) 
Where an application for registration of a motor vehicle which is held under a hire-purchase, lease or 
hypothecation agreement (hereafter in this section referred to as the said agreement) is made, the 
registering authority shall make an entry in the certificate of registration regarding the existence of the 
said agreement. 
(2) Where the ownership of any motor vehicle registered under this Chapter is transferred and the 
transferee enters into the said agreement with any person, the 1[last registering authority] shall, on receipt 
of an application in such form as the Central Government may prescribe from the parties to the said 
agreement, make an entry as to the existence of the said agreement in the certificate of registration 2[and 
an intimation in this behalf shall be sent to the original registering authority if the last registering 
authority is not the original registering authority]. 
(3) Any entry made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), may be cancelled by the 1[last registering 
authority] on proof of the termination of the said agreement by the parties concerned on an application 
being made in such form as the Central Government may prescribe 2[and an intimation in this behalf 
shall be sent to the original registering authority if the last registering authority is not the original 
registering authority]. 
(4) No entry regarding the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle which is held under the said 
agreement shall be made in the certificate of registration except with the written consent of the person 
whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the person with whom the registered 
owner has entered into the said agreement. 
(5) Where the person whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the person 
with whom the registered owner has entered into the said agreement, satisfies the registering authority 
that he has taken possession of the vehicle 3[from the registered owner] owing to the default of the 
registered owner under the provisions of the said agreement and that the registered owner refuses to 
deliver the certificate of registration or has absconded, such authority may, after giving the registered 
owner an opportunity to make such representation as he may wish to make (by sending to him a notice by 
registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of registration) and 
notwithstanding that the certificate of registration is not produced before it, cancel the certificate and 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 14, for “original registering authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Added by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

37 
 
issue a fresh certificate of registration in the name of the person with whom the registered owner has 
entered into the said agreement: 
Provided that a fresh certificate of registration shall not be issued in respect of a motor vehicle, unless 
such person pays the prescribed fee:  
Provided further that a fresh certificate of registration issued in respect of a motor vehicle, other than 
a transport vehicle, shall be valid only for the remaining period for which the certificate cancelled under 
this sub-section would have been in force. 
(6) The registered owner shall, before applying to the appropriate authority, for the renewal of a 
permit under section 81 or for the issue of duplicate certificate of registration under sub-section (14) of 
section 41, or for the assignment of a new registration mark 1[under section 47, or removal of the vehicle 
to another State, or at the time of conversion of the vehicle from one class to another, or for issue of no 
objection certificate under section 48, or for change of residence or place of business under section 49, or 
for the alteration of the vehicle under section 52, make an application] to the person with whom the 
registered owner has entered into the said agreement (such person being hereafter in this section referred 
to as the financier) for the issue of a no objection certificate (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
certificate). 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section and sub-sections (8) and (9), “appropriate 
authority”, in relation to any permit, means the authority which is authorised by this Act to renew such 
permit and, in relation to registration, means the authority which is authorised by this Act to issue 
duplicate certificate of registration or to assign a new registration mark. 
(7) Within seven days of the receipt of an application under sub-section (6), the financier may issue, 
or refuse, for reasons which shall be recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant, to issue, the 
certificate applied for, and where the financier fails to issue the certificate and also fails to communicate 
the reasons for refusal to issue the certificate to the applicant within the said period of seven days, the 
certificate applied for shall be deemed to have been issued by the financier. 
(8) The registered owner shall, while applying to the appropriate authority for the renewal of any 
permit under section 81, or for the issue of a duplicate certificate of registration under sub-section (14) of 
section 41, or while applying for assignment of a new registration mark under section 47, submit with 
such application the certificate, if any, obtained under sub-section (7) or, where no such certificate has 
been obtained, the communication received from the financier under that sub-section, or, as the case may 
be, a declaration that he has not received any communication from the financier within the period of 
seven days specified in that sub-section. 
(9) On receipt of an application for the renewal of any permit or for the issue of duplicate certificate 
of registration or for assignment of a new registration mark in respect of a vehicle which is held under the 
said agreement, the appropriate authority may, subject to the other provisions of this Act,— 
(a) in a case where the financier has refused to issue the certificate applied for, after giving the 
applicant an opportunity of being heard, either— 
(i) renew or refuse to renew the permit, or 
(ii) issue or refuse to issue the duplicate certificate of registration, or 
(iii) assign or refuse to assign a new registration mark; 
(b) in any other case,— 
(i) renew the permit, or 
(ii) issue duplicate certificate of registration, or 
(iii) assign a new registration mark. 
(10) A registering authority making an entry in the certificate of registration regarding— 
(a) hire-purchase lease or hypothecation agreement of a motor vehicle, or 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 14, for “under section 47, make an application” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

38 
 
(b) the cancellation under sub-section (3) of an entry, or 
(c) recording transfer of ownership of motor vehicle, or 
(d) any alteration in a motor vehicle, or 
(e) suspension or cancellation of registration of a motor vehicle, or 
(f) change of address, 
shall communicate 1[by registered post acknowledgment due] to the financier that such entry has been 
made. 
2[(11) A registering authority registering the new vehicle, or issuing the duplicate certificate of 
registration or a no objection certificate or a temporary certificate of registration, or issuing or 
renewing, a fitness certificate or substituting entries relating to another motor vehicle in the 
permit, shall intimate the financier of such transaction. 
(12) The registering authority where it is not the original registering authority, when making 
entry under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), or cancelling the said entry under sub-section (3) or 
issuing the fresh certificate of registration under sub-section (5) shall communicate the same to the 
original registering authority.] 
3[52. Alteration in motor vehicle.— (1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall so alter the vehicle that 
the particulars contained in the certificate of registration are at variance with those originally specified by 
the manufacturer: 
Provided that where the owner of a motor vehicle makes modification of the engine, or any part 
thereof, of a vehicle for facilitating its operation by different type of fuel or source of energy including 
battery, compressed natural gas, solar power, liquid petroleum gas or any other fuel or source of energy, 
by fitment of a conversion kit, such modification shall be carried out subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed: 
4[Provided further that the Central Government may prescribe specifications, conditions for approval, 
retro fitment and other related matters for the alteration of motor vehicles and in such cases, the warranty 
granted by the manufacturer shall not be considered as void for the purposes of such alteration or retro 
fitment.]  
Provided also that the Central Government may grant exemption for alteration of vehicles in a 
manner other than specified above, for any specific purpose. 
5[(1A) A manufacturer of a motor vehicle shall on the direction issued by the Central Government, 
alter or retrofit safety equipment, or any other equipment in accordance with such standards and 
specifications as may be specified by the Central Government.] 
6[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any person may, with the subsequent 
approval of the registering authority, alter or cause to be altered any vehicle owned by him to be 
converted into an adapted vehicle: 
Provided that such alteration complies with such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.] 
 (3) Where any alteration has been made in motor vehicle without the approval of registering 
authority 7***, the owner of the vehicle shall, within fourteen days of the making of the alteration, report 
the alteration to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction he resides and shall forward the 
 
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s.14 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub-section (11) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2000, s. 2, for s. 52 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 21, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-4-2021).  
5. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
7. The words “or by reason of replacement of its engine without such approval under sub-section (2)” omitted by s. 21, ibid., 
(w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

39 
 
certificate of registration to that authority together with the prescribed fee in order that particulars of 
registration may be entered therein. 
(4) A registering authority other than the original registering authority making any such entry shall 
communicate the details of the entry to the original registering authority. 
(5) Subject to the provisions made under sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4), no person holding a vehicle 
under a hire-purchase agreement shall make any alteration to the vehicle except with the written consent 
of the registered owner. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “alteration” means a change in the structure of a 
vehicle which results in a change in its basic feature.] 
53. Suspension of registration.—(1) If any registering authority or other prescribed authority has 
reason to believe that any motor vehicle within its jurisdiction— 
(a) is in such a condition that its use in a public place would constitute a danger to the public, or 
that it fails to comply with the requirements of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, or 
(b) has been, or is being, used for hire or reward without a valid permit for being used as such, 
the authority may, after giving the owner an opportunity of making any representation he may wish to 
make (by sending to the owner a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in 
the certificate of registration), for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the certificate of registration 
of the vehicle— 
(i) in any case falling under clause (a), until the defects are rectified to its satisfaction; and 
(ii) in any case falling under clause (b), for a period not exceeding four months. 
(2) An authority other than a registering authority shall, when making a suspension order under  
sub-section (1), intimate in writing the fact of such suspension and the reasons therefor to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction the vehicle is at the time of the suspension. 
(3) Where the registeration of a motor vehicle has been suspended under sub-section (1), for a 
continuous period of not less than one month, the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the 
vehicle was when the registration was suspended, shall, if it is not the original registering authority, 
inform that authority of the suspension. 
(4) The owner of a motor vehicle shall, on the demand of a registering authority or other prescribed 
authority which has suspended the certificate of registration of the vehicle under this section, surrender 
the certificate of registration. 
(5) A certificate of registration surrendered under sub-section (4) shall be returned to the owner when 
the order suspending registration has been rescinded and not before. 
54. Cancellation of registration suspended under section 53.—Where the suspension of 
registration of a vehicle under section 53 has continued without interruption for a period of not less than 
six months, the registering authority within whose jurisdiction the vehicle was when the registration was 
suspended, may, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the registration, and if it is not the 
original registering authority, shall forward the certificate of registration to that authority which may 
cancel the registration. 
55. Cancellation of registration.—(1) If a motor vehicle has been destroyed or has been rendered 
permanently incapable of use, the owner shall, within fourteen days or as soon as may be, report the fact 
to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the 
vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, and shall forward to that authority the certificate of 
registration of the vehicle. 
(2) The registering authority shall, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the registration and 
the certificate of registration, or, if it is not, shall forward the report and the certificate of registration to 
the original registering authority and that authority shall cancel the registration. 

40 
 
(3) Any registering authority may order the examination of a motor vehicle within its jurisdiction by 
such authority as the State Government may by order appoint and, if, upon such examination and after 
giving the owner an opportunity to make any representation he may wish to make (by sending to the 
owner a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of 
registration), it is satisfied that the vehicle is in such a condition that it is incapable of being used or its 
use in a public place would constitute a danger to the public and that it is beyond reasonable repair, may 
cancel the registration. 
(4) If a registering authority is satisfied that a motor vehicle has been permanently removed out of 
India, the registering authority shall cancel the registration. 
(5) If a registering authority is satisfied that the registration of a motor vehicle has been obtained on 
the basis of documents which were, or by representation of facts which was, false in any material 
particular, or the engine number or the chassis number embossed thereon are different from such number 
entered in the certificate of registration, the registering authority shall after giving the owner an 
opportunity to make such representation as he may wish to make (by sending to the owner a notice by 
registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of registration), and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing cancel the registration. 
1[(5A) If any registering authority or other prescribed authority has reason to believe that any motor 
vehicle within its jurisdiction has been used in the commission of an offence punishable under                 
section 199A, the authority may, after giving the owner an opportunity of making a representation in 
writing, cancel the certificate of registration of the vehicle for a period of one year: 
Provided that the owner of the motor vehicle may apply for fresh registration in accordance with the 
provisions of section 40 and section 41.] 
(6) A registering authority cancelling the registration of a motor vehicle under section 54 or under this 
section shall communicate such fact in writing to the owner of the vehicle, and the owner of the vehicle 
shall forthwith surrender to that authority the certificate of registration of the vehicle. 
(7) A registering authority making an order of cancellation under section 54 or under this                     
section shall, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the certificate of registration and the entry 
relating to the vehicle in its records, and, if it is not the original registering authority, forward the 
certificate of registration to that authority, and that authority shall cancel the certificate of registration and 
the entry relating to the motor vehicle in its records. 
(8) The expression “original registering authority” in this section and in sections 41, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53 
and 54 means the registering authority in whose records the registration of the vehicle is recorded. 
(9) In this section, “certificate of registration” includes a certificate of registration renewed under the 
provisions of this Act. 
56. Certificate of fitness of transport vehicles.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sections 59 and 60, 
a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be validly registered for the purposes of section 39, unless it 
carries a certificate of fitness in such form containing such particulars and information as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, issued by the prescribed authority, or by an authorised testing 
station mentioned in sub-section (2), to the effect that the vehicle complies for the time being with all the 
requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder: 
Provided that where the prescribed authority or the authorised testing station refuses is issue such 
certificate, it shall supply the owner of the vehicle with its reasons in writing for such refusal. 
2[Provided further that no certificate of fitness shall be granted to a vehicle, after such date as may be 
notified by the Central Government, unless such vehicle has been tested at an automated testing station.] 
3[(2) The “authorised testing station” referred to in sub-section (1) means any facility, including 
automated testing facilities, authorised by the State Government, where fitness testing may be conducted 
in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government for recognition, regulation and control of 
such stations.]  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a certificate of fitness shall remain effective for such 
period as may be prescribed by the Central Government having regard to the objects of this Act. 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by, s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
3. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

41 
 
(4) The prescribed authority may for reasons to be recorded in writing cancel a certificate of fitness at 
any time, if satisfied that the vehicle to which it relates no longer complies with all the requirements of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder; and on such cancellation the certificate of registration of the 
vehicle and any permit granted in respect of the vehicle under Chapter V shall be deemed to be suspended 
until a new certificate of fitness has been obtained: 
1[Provided that no such cancellation shall be made by the prescribed authority unless,— 
(a) such prescribed authority holds such technical qualification as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government and where the prescribed authority does not hold the technical qualification, such 
cancellation is made on the basis of the report of an officer having such qualification; and 
(b) the reasons recorded in writing cancelling a certificate of fitness are confirmed by an 
authorised testing station chosen by the owner of the vehicle whose certificate of fitness is sought to be 
cancelled: 
Provided further that if the cancellation is confirmed by the authorised testing station, the cost of 
undertaking the test shall be borne by the owner of the vehicle being tested and in the alternative by the 
prescribed authority.] 
 (5) A certificate of fitness issued under this Act shall, while it remains effective, be valid throughout 
India. 
2[(6) All transport vehicles with a valid certificate of fitness issued under this section shall carry, on 
their bodies, in a clear and visible manner such distinguishing mark as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
 (7) Subject to such conditions as the Central Government may prescribe, the provisions of this section 
may be extended to non-transport vehicles.] 
57. Appeals.—3[(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the registering authority under              
section 41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 55 or 56 may, within thirty days of the date on which he 
has received notice of such order, appeal against the order to the prescribed authority.] 
(2) The appellate authority shall give notice of the appeal to the original authority and after giving an 
opportunity to the original authority and the appellant to be heard in the appeal pass such orders as it 
thinks fit.  
58. Special provisions in regard to transport vehicles.—(1) The Central Government may, having 
regard to the number, nature and size of the tyres attached to the wheels of a transport vehicle, (other than 
a motor cab), and its make and model and other relevant considerations, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify, in relation to each make and model of a transport vehicle, the 4[maximum gross vehicle  
weight] of such vehicle and the maximum safe axle weight of each axle of such vehicle. 
(2) A registering authority, when registering a transport vehicle, other than a motor cab, shall enter in 
the record of registration and shall also enter in the certificate of registration of the vehicle the following 
particulars, namely:— 
(a) the unladen weight of the vehicle; 
(b) the number, nature and size of the tyres attached to each wheel; 
(c) the gross vehicle weight of the vehicle and the registered axle weights pertaining to the several 
axles thereof; and 
(d) if the vehicle is used or adapted to be used for the carriage of passengers solely or in addition 
to goods, the number of passengers for whom accommodation is provided, 
and the owner of the vehicle shall have the same particulars exhibited in the prescribed manner on the 
vehicle. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 23, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
3. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s.17, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
4. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “maximum safe laden weight” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

42 
 
(3) There shall not be entered in the certificate of registration of any such vehicle any gross vehicle 
weight or a registered axle weight of any of the axles different from that specified in the notification 
under sub-section (1) in relation to the make and model of such vehicle and to the number, nature and size 
of the tyres attached to its wheels: 
Provided that where it appears to the Central Government that heavier weights than those specified in 
the notification under sub-section (1) may be permitted in a particular locality for vehicles of a particular 
type, the Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette direct that the provisions of this  
sub-section shall apply with such modifications as may be specified in the order. 
1*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
(5) In order that the gross vehicle weight entered in the certificate of registration of a vehicle may be 
revised in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), the registering authority may require the 
owner of transport vehicle in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed to produce the 
certificate of registration within such time as may be specified by the registering authority. 
59. Power to fix the age limit of motor vehicle.—(1) The Central Government may, having regard 
to the public safety, convenience and objects of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
the life of a motor vehicle reckoned from the date of its manufacture, after the expiry of which the motor 
vehicle shall not be deemed to comply with the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder: 
Provided that the Central Government may specify different ages for different classes or different 
types of motor vehicles. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government may, having 
regard to the purpose of a motor vehicle, such as, display or use for the purposes of a demonstration in 
any exhibition, use for the purposes of technical research or taking part in a vintage car rally, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, by a general or special order, subject to such conditions as 
may be specified in such notification, any class or type of motor vehicle from the operation of  
sub-section (1) for the purpose to be stated in the notification. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 56, no prescribed authority or authorised testing 
station shall grant a certificate of fitness to a motor vehicle in contravention of the provisions of any 
notification issued under sub-section (1). 
2[(4) The Central Government may, having regard to the public safety, convenience, protection of the 
environment and the objects of this Act, make rules prescribing the manner of recycling of motor vehicles 
and parts thereof which have exceeded their life.] 
60. Registration of vehicles belonging to the Central Government.—(1) Such authority as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, may register any motor vehicle 
which is the property or for the time being under the exclusive control of the Central Government and is 
used for Government purposes relating to the defence of the country and unconnected with any 
commercial enterprise and any vehicle so registered shall not, so long as it remains the property or under 
the exclusive control of the Central Government, require to be registered otherwise under this Act. 
(2) The authority registering a vehicle under sub-section (1) shall assign a registration mark in 
accordance with the provisions contained in the rules made in this behalf by the Central Government and 
shall issue a certificate in respect of that vehicle to the effect that such vehicle complies for the time being 
with all the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder and that the vehicle has been 
registered under this section. 
(3) A vehicle registered under this section shall carry the certificate issued under sub-section (2). 
(4) If a vehicle registered under this section ceases to be the property or under the exclusive control of 
the Central Government, the provisions of sections 39 and 40 shall thereupon apply. 
 
1. S.s. (4) omitted by Act 27 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

43 
 
(5) The authority registering a vehicle under sub-section (1) shall furnish to any State Government all 
such information regarding the general nature, overall dimensions and axle weights of the vehicle as the 
State Government may at any time require. 
61. Application of Chapter to trailers.—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the 
registration of trailers as they apply to the registration of any other motor vehicle. 
(2) The registration mark assigned to a trailer shall be displayed in such manner on the side of the 
drawing vehicle, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) No person shall drive a motor vehicle to which a trailer is or trailers are attached unless the 
registration mark of the motor vehicle so driven is displayed on the trailer or on the last trailer in the train, 
as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
62. Information regarding stolen and recovered motor vehicles to be furnished by the police to 
the State Transport Authority.—The State Government may, if it thinks necessary or expedient so to do 
in the public interest, direct the submission by the Inspector General of Police (by whatever designation 
called) and such other police officers as the State Government may specify in this behalf, of such returns 
containing the information regarding vehicles which have been stolen and stolen vehicles which have 
been recovered of which the police are aware, to the State Transport Authority, and may prescribe the 
form in which and the period within which such returns shall be made. 
1[62A. Prohibition of registration and issuance of certificate of fitness to oversized vehicles.—(1) 
No registering authority shall register any motor vehicle that contravenes any rule made under clause (a) 
of sub-section (1) of section 110. 
(2) No prescribed authority or authorised testing station shall issue a certificate of fitness under 
section 56 to any motor vehicle that contravenes any rule made under section 110. 
62B. National Register of Motor Vehicles.—(1) The Central Government shall maintain a National 
Register of Motor Vehicles in such form and manner as may be prescribed by it: 
Provided that all State Registers of Motor Vehicles shall be subsumed under the National Register of 
Motor Vehicles by such date as may be notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government. 
(2) No certificate of registration issued, or renewed, under this Act shall be valid unless it has been 
issued a unique registration number under the National Register of Motor Vehicles. 
(3) In order to maintain the National Register of Motor Vehicles, all State Governments and 
registering authorities under this Act shall transmit all information and data in the State Register of Motor 
Vehicles to the Central Government in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(4) State Governments shall be able to access the National Register of Motor Vehicles and update 
records in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made by the Central Government 
thereunder.] 
2[63. Maintenance of State Registers of Motor Vehicles.—(1) Each State Government shall 
maintain in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government a register to be known as the 
State Register of Motor Vehicles, in respect of the motor vehicles in that State, containing the particulars 
including—  
(a) registration numbers;  
(b) years of manufacture;  
(c) classes and types;  
(d) names and addresses of registered owners; and  
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed by the Central Government.]  
 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for s. 63 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

44 
 
64. Power of Central Government to make rules.—The Central Government may make rules to 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the period within which and the form in which an application shall be made and the 
documents, particulars and information it shall accompany under sub-section (1) of section 41; 
(b) the form in which the certificate of registration shall be made and the particulars and 
information it shall contain and the manner in which it shall be issued under sub-section (3) of  
section 41; 
(c) the form and manner in which the particulars of the certificate of registration shall be entered 
in the records of the registering authority under sub-section (5) of section 41; 
(d) the manner in which and the form in which the registration mark, the letters and figures and 
other particulars referred to in sub-section (6) of section 41 shall be displayed and shown; 
1[(da) providing for the period of validity of a certificate of registration under sub-section (7) of 
section 41;] 
(e) the period within which and the form in which the application shall be made and the 
particulars and information it shall contain under sub-section (8) of section 41; 
1[(ea) the period of renewal of certificate of registration of different types of motor vehicles under 
sub-section (10) of section 41;] 
(f) the form in which the application referred to in sub-section (14) of section 41 shall be made, 
the particulars and information it shall contain and the fee to be charged; 
1[(fa) the issue of temporary certificate of registration and temporary registration mark under 
section 43; 
(fb) the terms and conditions under which a motor vehicle sold by an authorised dealer shall not 
require production before a registering authority under sub-section (1) of section 44;] 
(g) the form in which the period within which the application referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 47 shall be made and the particulars it shall contain; 
(h) the form in which and the manner in which the application for “No Objection Certificate” 
shall be made under sub-section (1) of section 48 and the form of receipt to be issued under  
sub-section (2) of section 48; 
(i) the matters that are to be complied with by an applicant before no objection certificate may be 
issued under section 48; 
(j) the form in which the intimation of change of address shall be made under sub-section (1) of 
section 49 and the documents to be submitted along with the application; 
2[(ja) the form and manner for the electronic submission of the intimation of change of address, 
documents to be submitted along with such intimation including proof of authentication under  
sub-section (1A) of section 49;] 
(k) the form in which and the manner in which the intimation of transfer of ownership shall be 
made under sub-section (1) of section 50 or under sub-section (2) of section 50 and the document to 
be submitted along with the application; 
(l) the form in which the application under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 51 shall 
be made; 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

45 
 
1[(la) specifications, conditions for approval, retrofitment and other related matters for the 
alteration of motor vehicles under sub-section (1) of section 52; 
(lb) the conditions for the alteration of any motor vehicle into an adapted vehicle under                     
sub-section (2) of section 52;] 
(m) the form in which the certificate of fitness shall be issued under sub-section (1) of section 56 
and the particulars and information it shall contain; 
(n) the period for which the certificate of fitness granted or renewed under section 56 shall be 
effective; 
1[(na) the distinguishing mark to be carried on the body of transport vehicles under                     
sub-section (6) of section 56; 
(nb) the conditions under which the application of section 56 may be extended to non-transport 
vehicles under sub-section (7) of section 56; 
(nc) the recycling of motor vehicles and parts thereof which have exceeded their life under  
sub-section (4) of section 59;] 
(o) the fees to be charged for the issue or renewal or alteration of certificates of registration, for 
making an entry regarding transfer of ownership on a certificate of registration, for making or 
cancelling an endorsement in respect of agreement of hire-purchase or lease or hypothecation on a 
certificate of registration, for certificates of fitness for registration marks, and for the examination or 
inspection of motor vehicles, and the refund of such fees. 
1[(oa) all or any of the matters under sub-section (1) of section 62B; 
(ob) all or any of the matters under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 63;] 
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed by the Central Government.  
65. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in  
section 64. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter (the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees); 
(b) the appointment, functions and jurisdiction of registering and other prescribed authorities; 
(c) the exemption of road-rollers, graders and other vehicles designed and used solely for the 
construction, repair and cleaning of roads from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter and the 
rules made thereunder and the conditions governing such exemption; 
(d) the issue or renewal of certificates of registration and fitness and duplicates of such 
certificates to replace the certificates lost, destroyed or mutilated; 
(e) the production of certificates of registration before the registering authority for the revision of 
entries therein of particulars relating to the gross vehicle weight; 
(f) the temporary registration of motor vehicles, and the issue of temporary certificate of 
registration and marks 2[under the proviso to section 43]; 
(g) the manner in which the particulars referred to in sub-section (2) of section 58 and other 
prescribed particulars shall be exhibited; 
(h) the exemption of prescribed persons or prescribed classes of persons from payment of all or 
any portion of the fees payable under this Chapter; 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

46 
 
(i) the forms, other than those prescribed by the Central Government, to be used for the purpose 
of this Chapter; 
(j) the communication between registering authorities of particulars of certificates of registration 
and by owners of vehicles registered outside the State of particulars of such vehicles and of their 
registration; 
(k) the amount or amounts under sub-section (13) of section 41 or sub-section (7) of section 47 or 
sub-section (4) of section 49 or sub-section (5) of section 50; 
(l) the extension of the validity of certificates of fitness pending consideration of applications for 
their renewal; 
(m) the exemption from the provisions of this Chapter, and the conditions and fees for exemption, 
of motor vehicles in the possession of dealers; 
(n) the form in which and the period within which the return under section 62 shall be sent; 
1* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(p) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
STATE AMENDMENT 
Haryana 
Amendment of section 65.—For clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 65 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988, the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(h) the exemption of prescribed persons or prescribed classes of persons from payment of all or any 
portion of the fee payable under this Chapter retrospectively or prospectively;” 
[Vide Haryana Act 39 of 2019, s. 2] 
CHAPTER V 
CONTROL OF TRANSPORT VEHICLES 
66. Necessity for permits.—(1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the 
vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any 
passengers or goods save in accordance with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a 
Regional or State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle 
in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being used: 
Provided that a stage carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the 
permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a contract carriage: 
Provided further that a stage carriage permit may, subject to any conditions that may be specified in 
the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a goods carriage either when carrying passengers or not: 
Provided also that a goods carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the 
permit, authorise the use of the vehicle for the carriage of goods for or in connection with a trade or 
business carried on by him: 
2[Provided also that where a transport vehicle has been issued any permit or permits, as well as a 
licence under this Act, such vehicle may be used either under the permit, or permits, so issued to it, or 
under such licence, at the discretion of the vehicle owner.] 
(2) The holder of a goods carriage permit may use the vehicle, for the drawing of any public or               
semitrailer not owned by him, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed: 
3[Provided that the holder of a permit of any articulated vehicle may use the prime-mover of that 
articulated vehicle for any other semi-trailor.] 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply— 
(a) to any transport vehicle owned by the Central Government or a State Government and used 
for Government purposes unconnected with any commercial enterprise; 
(b) to any transport vehicle owned by a local authority or by a person acting under contract with a 
local authority and used solely for road cleansing, road watering or conservancy purposes; 
 
1. Cl. (o) omitted by Act 32 of 2019, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Added by Act 54 of 1994, s. 20 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

47 
 
(c) to any transport vehicle used solely for police, fire brigade or ambulance purposes; 
(d) to any transport vehicle used solely for the conveyance of corpses and the mourners 
accompanying the corpses; 
(e) to any transport vehicle used for towing a disabled vehicle or for removing goods from a 
disabled vehicle to a place of safety; 
(f) to any transport vehicle used for any other public purpose as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in this behalf; 
(g) to any transport vehicle used by a person who manufactures or deals in motor vehicles or 
builds bodies for attachment to chassis, solely for such purposes and in accordance with such 
conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf; 
1* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(i) to any goods vehicle, the gross vehicle weight of which does not exceed 3,000 kilograms; 
(j) subject to such conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify, to any transport vehicle purchased in one State and proceeding to a place, situated in 
that State or in any other State, without carrying any passenger or goods; 
(k) to any transport vehicle which has been temporarily registered under section 43 while 
proceeding empty to any place for the purpose of registration of the vehicle; 
2* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(m) to any transport vehicle which, owing to flood, earthquake or any other natural calamity, 
obstruction on road, or unforeseen circumstances is required to be diverted through any other route, 
whether within or outside the State, with a view to enabling it to reach its destination; 
(n) to any transport vehicle used for such purposes as the Central or State Government may, by 
order, specify; 
(o) to any transport vehicle which is subject to a hire-purchase, lease or hypothecation agreement 
and which owing to the default of the owner has been taken possession of by or on behalf of, the 
person with whom the owner has entered into such agreement, to enable such motor vehicle to reach 
its destination; or 
(p) to any transport vehicle while proceeding empty to any place for purpose of repair; 
3[(q) to any transport vehicle having been issued a licence under a scheme, under sub-section (3) 
of section 67 or sub-section (1) of section 88A, or plying under such orders as may be issued by the 
Central Government or by the State Government.] 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), sub-section (1) shall, if the State Government by rule 
made under section 96 so prescribes, apply to any motor vehicle adapted to carry more than nine persons 
excluding the driver. 
4[66A. National Transportation Policy.—The Central Government may develop a National 
Transportation Policy consistent with the objects of this Act in concurrence with the State Governments 
and other agencies with a view to— 
(i) establish a planning framework for passengers and goods transportation within which transport 
bodies are to operate; 
 
1. Cl. (h) omitted by Act 27 of 2000, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 
2. Cl. (l) omitted by Act 39 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-9-2001). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

48 
 
(ii) establish a medium and long term planning framework for all forms of road transport, identify 
areas for the development of transport improvement infrastructure across India in consultation with 
the authorities and agencies related to ports, railways and aviation as well as with local and State level 
planning, land holding and regulatory authorities for the delivery of an integrated multimodal 
transport system; 
(iii) establish the framework of grant of permits and schemes; 
(iv) establish strategic policy for transport by road and its role as a link to other means of 
transport; 
(v) identify strategic policies and specify priorities for the transport system that address current 
and future challenges; 
(vi) provide medium to long term strategic directions, priorities and actions; 
(vii) promote competition, innovation, increase in capacity, seamless mobility and greater 
efficiency in transport of goods or livestock or passengers, and economical use of resources; 
(viii) safeguard the interest of the public and promote equity, while seeking to enhance private 
participation and public-private partnership in the transport sector; 
(ix) demonstrate an integrated approach to transport and land use planning; 
(x) identify the challenges that the National Transportation Policy seeks to address; and 
(xi) address any other matter deemed relevant by the Central Government. 
66B. No bar against permit holders to apply and hold licences under schemes.—No person who 
holds the permit issued under this Act shall— 
(a) be disqualified from applying for a licence under the scheme made under sub-section (3) of 
section 67 or sub-section (1) of section 88A by reason of holding such permit; and 
(b) be required to get such permit cancelled on being issued a licence under any scheme made 
under this Act.] 
67. Power to State Government to control road transport.—1[(1) A State Government, having 
regard to— 
(a) the advantages offered to the public, trade and industry by the development of motor 
transport; 
(b) the desirability of co-ordinating road and rail transport; 
(c) the desirability of preventing the deterioration of the road system; and 
(d) promoting effective competition among the transport service providers, 
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette issue directions both to the State Transport 
Authority and Regional Transport Authority regarding the passengers’ convenience, economically 
competitive fares, prevention of overcrowding and road safety.] 
(2) Any direction under sub-section (1) regarding the fixing of fares and freights for stage carriages, 
contract carriages and goods carriages may provide that such fares or freights shall be inclusive of the tax 
payable by the passengers or the consignors of the goods, as the case may be, to the operators of the stage 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019 s. 31, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

49 
 
carriages, contract carriages or goods carriages under any law for the time being in force relating to tax on 
passengers and goods: 
1[Provided that the State Government may subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, and with a 
view to achieving the objectives specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1), relax all or any of the 
provisions made under this Chapter.] 
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, modify any permit issued under this Act or make schemes for the transportation of 
goods and passengers and issue licences under such scheme for the promotion of development and 
efficiency in transportation— 
(a) last mile connectivity; 
(b) rural transport; 
(c) reducing traffic congestion; 
(d) improving urban transport; 
(e) safety of road users; 
(f) better utilisation of transportation assets; 
(g) the enhancement of economic vitality of the area, through competitiveness, productivity and 
efficiency; 
(h) the increase in the accessibility and mobility of people; 
(i) the protection and enhancement of the environment; 
(j) the promotion of energy conservation; 
(k) improvement of the quality of life; 
(l) enhance integration and connectivity of the transportation system, across and between modes 
of transport; and 
(m) such other matters as the Central Government may deem fit. 
(4) The scheme framed under sub-section (3), shall specify the fees to be charged, form of application 
and grant of a licence including the renewal, suspension, cancellation or modification of such licence.] 
68. Transport Authorities.—(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute for the State a State Transport Authority to exercise and discharge the powers and functions 
specified in sub-section (3), and shall in like manner constitute Regional Transport Authorities to exercise 
and discharge throughout such areas (in this Chapter referred to as regions) as may be specified in the 
notification, in respect of each Regional Transport Authority; the powers and functions conferred by or 
under this Chapter on such Authorities: 
Provided that in the Union territories, the Administrator may abstain from constituting any Regional 
Transport Authority. 
(2) A State Transport Authority or a Regional Transport Authority shall consist of a Chairman who 
has had judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an adjudicating 
authority competent to pass any order or take any decision under any law and in the case of a State 
Transport Authority, such other persons (whether officials or not), not being more than four and, in the 
case of a Regional Transport Authority, such other persons (whether officials or not), not being more than 
two, as the State Government may think fit to appoint; but no person who has any financial interest 
whether as proprietor, employee or otherwise in any transport undertaking shall be appointed, or continue  
 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

50 
 
to be, a member of a State or Regional Transport Authority, and, if any person being a member of any 
such Authority acquires a financial interest in any transport undertaking, he shall within four weeks of so 
doing, give notice in writing to the State Government of the acquisition of such interest and shall vacate 
office: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any of the members of the State Transport 
Authority or a Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, to preside over a meeting of such 
Authority during the absence of the Chairman, notwithstanding that such member does not possess 
judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an adjudicating authority 
competent to pass any order or take any decision under any law: 
Provided further that the State Government may,— 
(i) where it considers necessary or expedient so to do, constitute the State Transport Authority or 
a Regional Transport Authority for any region so as to consist of only one member who shall be an 
official with judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an 
adjudicating authority competent to pass any order or take any decision under any law; 
(ii) by rules made in this behalf, provide for the transaction of business of such authorities in the 
absence of the Chairman or any other member and specify the circumstances under which, and the 
manner in which, such business could be so transacted: 
Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as debarring an official (other than an 
official connected directly with the management or operation of a transport undertaking) from being 
appointed or continuing as a member of any such authority merely by reason of the fact that the 
Government employing the official has, or acquires, any financial interest in a transport undertaking. 
(3) The State Transport Authority and every Regional Transport Authority shall give effect to any 
directions issued under section 67 and the State Transport Authority shall, subject to such directions and 
save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, exercise and discharge throughout the State the 
following powers and functions, namely:— 
(a) to co-ordinate and regulate the activities and policies of the Regional Transport Authorities, if 
any, of the State; 
(b) to perform the duties of a Regional Transport Authority where there is no such Authority and, 
if it thinks fit or if so required by a Regional Transport Authority, to perform those duties in respect 
of any route common to two or more regions; 
(c) to settle all disputes and decide all matters on which differences of opinion arise between 
Regional Transport Authorities; and 
1[(ca) Government to formulate routes for plying stage carriages;] 
(d) to discharge such other functions as may be prescribed. 
(4) For the purpose of exercising and discharging the powers and functions specified in  
sub-section (3), a State Transport Authority may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, issue 
directions to any Regional Transport Authority, and the Regional Transport Authority shall, in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act, give effect to and be guided by such directions. 
(5) The State Transport Authority and any Regional Transport Authority, if authorised in this behalf 
by rules made under section 96, may delegate such of its powers and functions to such authority or person 
subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as may be prescribed by the said rules.  
69. General provision as to applications for permits.—(1) Every application for a permit shall be 
made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which it is proposed to use the vehicle or 
vehicles: 
Provided that if it is proposed to use the vehicle or vehicles in two or more regions lying within the 
same State, the application shall be made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which the 
 
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 22 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

51 
 
major portion of the proposed route or area lies, and in case the portion of the proposed route or area in 
each of the regions is approximately equal, to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which it 
is proposed to keep the vehicle or vehicles: 
Provided further that if it is proposed to use the vehicle or vehicles in two or more regions lying in 
different States, the application shall be made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which 
the applicant resides or has his principal place of business. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, direct that in the case of any vehicle or vehicles proposed to be used in two or 
more regions lying in different States, the application under that sub-section shall be made to the State 
Transport Authority of the region in which the applicant resides or has his principal place of business. 
70. Application for stage carriage permit.—(1) An application for a permit in respect of a stage 
carriage (in this Chapter referred to as a stage carriage permit) or as a reserve stage carriage shall, as far 
as may be, contain the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the route or routes or the area or areas to which the application relates; 
(b) the type and seating capacity of each such vehicle; 
(c) the minimum and maximum number of daily trips proposed to be provided and the time-table 
of the normal trips. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, section 72, section 80 and section 102, “trip” 
means a single journey from one point to another, and every return journey shall be deemed to be a 
separate trip; 
(d) the number of vehicles intended to be kept in reserve to maintain the service and to provide 
for special occasions; 
(e) the arrangements intended to be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the vehicles, 
for the comfort and convenience of passengers and for the storage and safe custody of luggage; 
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(2) An application referred to in sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such documents as may be 
prescribed. 
71. Procedure of Regional Transport Authority in considering application for stage carriage 
permit.—(1) A Regional Transport Authority shall, while considering an application for a stage carriage 
permit, have regard to the objects of this Act. 
1*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(2) A Regional Transport Authority shall refuse to grant a stage carriage permit if it appears from any 
time-table furnished that the provisions of this Act relating to the speed at which vehicles may be driven 
are likely to be contravened: 
Provided that before such refusal an opportunity shall be given to the applicant to amend the                 
time-table so as to conform to the said provisions. 
(3) (a) The State Government shall, if so directed by the Central Government having regard to the 
number of vehicles, road conditions and other relevant matters, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct a State Transport Authority and a Regional Transport Authority to limit the number of stage 
carriages generally or of any specified type, as may be fixed and specified in the notification, operating on 
city routes in towns with a population of not less than five lakhs. 
(b) Where the number of stage carriages are fixed under clause (a), the Government of the State shall 
reserve in the State certain percentage of stage carriage permits for the scheduled castes and the scheduled 
tribes in the same ratio as in the case of appointments made by direct recruitment to public services in the 
State. 
 
1. Proviso omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 23 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

52 
 
(c) Where the number of stage carriages are fixed under clause (a), the Regional Transport Authority 
shall reserve such number of permits for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes as may be fixed by 
the State Government under sub-clause (b).  
(d) After reserving such number of permits as is referred to in clause (c), the Regional Transport 
Authority shall in considering an application have regard to the following matters, namely:— 
(i) financial stability of the applicant; 
(ii) satisfactory performance as a stage carriage operator including payment of tax if the applicant 
is or has been an operator of stage carriage service; and 
(iii) such other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government: 
Provided that, other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to applications for permits 
from— 
(i) State transport undertakings; 
(ii) co-operative societies registered or deemed to have been registered under any enactment for 
the time being in force; 1*** 
(iii) ex-servicemen; 2[or] 
2[(iv) any other class or category of persons, as the State Government may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, consider necessary.] 
3*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
      * 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “company” means any body corporate, and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Kerala 
Amendment of section 71.—In section 71 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988), 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (4).— 
(i) for the words “five” and “ten”, the words “ten” and “fifty” shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “any company”, the words “any co-operative society or to any company” shall be 
substituted. 
[Vide Kerala Act 12 of 1993, sec. 2.] 
72. Grant of stage carriage permits.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 71, a Regional 
Transport Authority may, on an application made to it under section 70, grant a stage carriage permit in 
accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse to grant such a permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any route or area not specified in the 
application. 
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a stage carriage permit, may grant the 
permit for a stage carriage of a specified description and may, subject to any rules that may be made 
under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicles shall be used only in a specified area, or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) that the operation of the stage carriage shall be commenced with effect from a specified date; 
(iii) the minimum and maximum number of daily trips to be provided in relation to any route or 
area generally or on specified days and occasions; 
(iv) that copies of the time-table of the stage carriage approved by the Regional Transport 
Authority shall be exhibited on the vehicles and at specified stands and halts on the route or within 
the area; 
(v) that the stage carriage shall be operated within such margins of deviation from the approved 
time-table as the Regional Transport Authority may from time to time specify; 
(vi) that within municipal limits and such other areas and places as may be prescribed, passengers 
or goods shall not be taken up or set down except at specified points; 
 
1. The word “or” omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 23 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. S. s. (4) and (5) omitted by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

53 
 
(vii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage that may be 
carried on the stage carriage, either generally or on specified occasions or at specified times and 
seasons; 
(viii) the weight and nature of passengers, luggage that shall be carried free of charge, the total 
weight of luggage that may be carried in relation to each passenger, and the arrangements that shall 
be made for the carriage of luggage without causing inconvenience to passengers; 
(ix) the rate of charge that may be levied for passengers’ luggage in excess of the free allowance; 
(x) that vehicles of a specified type fitted with body conforming to approved specifications shall 
be used: 
Provided that the attachment of this condition to a permit shall not prevent the continued use, for 
a period of two years from the date of publication of the approved specifications, of any vehicle 
operating on that date; 
(xi) that specified standards of comfort and cleanliness shall be maintained in the vehicles; 
(xii) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in the stage carriage in addition to or to 
the exclusion of passengers; 
(xiii) that fares shall be charged in accordance with the approved fare table; 
(xiv) that a copy of, or extract from, the fare table approved by the Regional Transport Authority 
and particulars of any special fares or rates of fares so approved for particular occasions shall be 
exhibited on the stage carriage and at specified stands and halts; 
(xv) that tickets bearing specified particulars shall be issued to passengers and shall show the 
fares actually charged and that records of tickets issued shall be kept in a specified manner; 
(xvi) that mails shall be carried on the vehicle subject to such conditions (including conditions as 
to the time in which mails are to be carried and the charges which may be levied) as may be specified; 
(xvii) the vehicles to be kept as reserve by the holder of the permit to maintain the operation and 
to provide for special occasions; 
(xviii) the conditions subject to which vehicle may be used as a contract carriage; 
(xix) that specified arrangements shall be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of 
vehicle; 
(xx) that any specified bus station or shelter maintained by Government or a local authority shall 
be used and that any specified rent or fee shall be paid for such use; 
(xxi) that the conditions of the permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of the 
Regional Transport Authority; 
(xxii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one 
month,— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions: 
Provided that the conditions specified in pursuance of clause (i) shall not be varied so as to alter 
the distance covered by the original route by more than 24 kilometers, and any variation within such 
limits shall be made only after the Regional Transport Authority is satisfied that such variation will 
serve the convenience of the public and that it is not expedient to grant a separate permit in respect of 
the original route as so varied or any part thereof; 
(xxiii) that the holder of a permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government may from time to time prescribe; 
(xxiv) any other conditions which may be prescribed: 

54 
 
1[Provided that the Regional Transport Authority may waive any such condition for a stage carriage 
permit operating in a rural area, as it deems fit.] 
73. Application for contract carriage permit.—An application for a permit in respect of a contract 
carriage (in this Chapter referred to as a contract carriage permit) shall contain the following particulars, 
namely:— 
(a) the type and seating capacity of the vehicle; 
(b) the area for which the permit is required; 
(c) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 
74. Grant of contract carriage permit.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), a Regional 
Transport Authority may, on an application made to it under section 73, grant a contract carriage permit 
in accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse to grant such a 
permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area not specified in the application.  
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a contract carriage permit, may, subject to 
any rules that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following 
conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicles shall be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) that except in accordance with specified conditions, no contract of hiring, other than an 
extension or modification of a subsisting contract, may be entered into outside the specified area; 
(iii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage that may be carried 
on the vehicles, either generally or on specified occasions or at specified times and seasons; 
 (iv) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in any contract carriage in addition to, 
or to the exclusion of, passengers; 
(v) that, in the case of motor cabs, specified fares or rates of fares shall be charged and a copy of 
the fare table shall be exhibited on the vehicle; 
(vi) that, in the case of vehicles other than motor cabs, specified rates of hiring not exceeding 
specified maximum shall be charged; 
(vii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a special weight of passengers’ luggage shall be carried free 
of charge, and that the charge, if any, for any luggage in excess thereof shall be at a specified rate; 
(viii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a taximeter shall be fitted and maintained in proper working 
order, if prescribed; 
(ix) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one month,— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions; 
(x) that the conditions of permit shall not be departed from save with the approval of the Regional 
Transport Authority; 
(xi) that specified standards of comfort and cleanliness shall be maintained in the vehicles; 
(xii) that, except in the circumstances of exceptional nature, the plying of the vehicle or carrying 
of the passengers shall not be refused; 
(xiii) any other conditions which may be prescribed: 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 32 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

55 
 
1[Provided that the Regional Transport Authority may in the interests of last mile connectivity waive 
any such condition in respect of any such types of vehicles as may be specified by the Central 
Government.] 
(3) (a) The State Government shall, if so directed by the Central Government, having regard to the 
number of vehicles, road conditions and other relevant matters, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct a State Transport Authority and a Regional Transport Authority to limit the number of contract 
carriages generally or of any specified type, as may be fixed and specified in the notification, operating on 
city routes in towns with a population of not less than five lakhs. 
(b) Where the number of contract carriages are fixed under clause (a), the Regional Transport 
Authority shall, in considering an application for the grant of permit in respect of any such contract 
carriage, have regard to the following matters, namely:— 
(i) financial stability of the applicant; 
(ii) satisfactory performance as a contract carriage operator including payment of tax if the 
applicant is or has been an operator of contract carriages; and 
(iii) such other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government: 
Provided that, other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to applications for permits 
from— 
(i) the India Tourism Development Corporation; 
(ii) State Tourism Development Corporations; 
(iii) State Tourism Departments; 
(iv) State transport undertakings; 
(v) co-operative societies registered or deemed to have been registered under any enactment for 
the time being in force; 
(vi) ex-servicemen; 
1[(vii) self-help groups.] 
75. Scheme for renting of motor cabs.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make a scheme for the purpose of regulating the business of renting of 2[motor cabs or 
motor cycles to persons desiring to drive either by themselves or through drivers, motor cabs or motor 
cycles] for their own use and for matters connected therewith. 
(2) A scheme made under sub-section (1) may provide for all or any of the following matters,  
namely:— 
(a) licensing of operators under the scheme including grant, renewal and revocation of such 
licences; 
(b) form of application and form of licences and the particulars to be contained therein; 
(c) fee to be paid with the application for such licences; 
(d) the authorities to which the application shall be made; 
(e) condition subject to which such licences may be granted, renewed or revoked; 
(f) appeals against orders of refusal to grant or renew such licences and appeals against orders 
revoking such licences; 
(g) conditions subject to which motor cabs may be rented; 
(h) maintenance of records and inspection of such records; 
(i) such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 24, for “motor cabs to persons desiring to drive the cabs” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

56 
 
76. Application for private service vehicle permit.—(1) A Regional Transport Authority may, on 
an application made to it, grant a private service vehicle permit in accordance with the application or with 
such modification as it deems fit or refuse to grant such permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area or route not specified in the 
application. 
(2) An application for a permit to use a motor vehicle as a private service vehicle shall contain the 
following particulars, namely:— 
(a) type and seating capacity of the vehicle; 
(b) the area or the route or routes to which the application relates; 
(c) the manner in which it is claimed that the purpose of carrying persons otherwise than for hire 
or reward or in connection with the trade or business carried on by the applicant will be served by the 
vehicle; and 
(d) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 
(3) The Regional Transport Authority if it decides to grant the permit may, subject to any rules that 
may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicle be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) the maximum number of persons and the maximum weight of luggage that may be carried; 
(iii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one month— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions; 
(iv) that the conditions of permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of the 
Regional Transport Authority; 
(v) that specified standards of comforts and cleanliness shall be maintained in the vehicle; 
(vi) that the holder of the permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government may, from time to time, specify; and 
(vii) such other conditions as may be prescribed. 
77. Application for goods carriage permit.—An application for a permit to use a motor vehicle for 
the carriage of goods for hire or reward or for the carriage of goods for or in connection with a trade or 
business carried on by the applicant (in this Chapter referred to as a goods carriage permit) shall, as far as 
may be, contain the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the area or the route or routes to which the application relates; 
(b) the type and capacity of the vehicle; 
(c) the nature of the goods it is proposed to carry; 
(d) the arrangements intended to be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the vehicle 
and for the storage and safe custody of the goods; 
(e) such particulars as the Regional Transport Authority may require with respect to any business 
as a carrier of goods for hire or reward carried on by the applicant at any time before the making of 
the application, and of the rates charged by the applicant; 
(f) particulars of any agreement, or arrangement, affecting in any material respect the provision 
within the region of the Regional Transport Authority of facilities for the transport of goods for hire 
or reward, entered into by the applicant with any other person by whom such facilities are provided, 
whether within or without the region; 
(g) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 

57 
 
78. Consideration of application for goods carriage permit.—A Regional Transport Authority 
shall, in considering an application for a goods carriage permit, have regard to the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the nature of the goods to be carried with special reference to their dangerous or hazardous 
nature to human life; 
(b) the nature of the chemicals or explosives to be carried with special reference to the safety to 
human life. 
79. Grant of goods carriage permit.—(1) A Regional Transport Authority may, on an application 
made to it under section 77, grant a goods carriage permit to be valid throughout the State or in 
accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse to grant such a permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area or route not specified in the 
application. 
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a goods carriage permit, may grant the 
permit and may, subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or 
more of the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicle shall be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) that the gross vehicle weight of any vehicle used shall not exceed a specified maximum; 
(iii) that goods of a specified nature shall not be carried; 
(iv) that goods shall be carried at specified rates; 
(v) that specified arrangement shall be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the 
vehicle and the storage and safe custody of the goods carried; 
(vi) that the holder of the permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government may, from time to time, prescribe; 
(vii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one month,— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions; 
(viii) that the conditions of the permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of the 
Regional Transport Authority; 
(ix) any other conditions which may be prescribed. 
(3) The conditions referred to in sub-section (2) may include conditions relating to the packaging and 
carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life. 
80. Procedure in applying for and granting permits.—(1) An application for a permit of any kind 
may be made at any time. 
(2) A 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 66] shall not ordinarily refuse to grant an application for permit of any 
kind made at any time under this Act: 
Provided that the 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed 
authority referred to in sub-section (1) of section 66] may summarily refuse the application if the grant of 
any permit in accordance with the application would have the effect of increasing the number of stage 
carriages as fixed and specified in a notification in the Official Gazette under clause (a) of sub-section (3) 
of section 71 or of contract carriages as fixed and specified in a notification in the Official Gazette under 
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 74: 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 25, for “Regional Transport Authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

58 
 
Provided further that where a 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any 
prescribed authority referred to in sub-section (1) of section 66] refuses an application for the grant of a 
permit of any kind under this Act, it shall give to the applicant in writing its reasons for the refusal of the 
same and an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(3) An application to vary the conditions of any permit, other than a temporary permit, by the 
inclusion of a new route or routes or a new area or by altering the route or routes or area covered by it, or 
in the case of a stage carriage permit by increasing the number of trips above the specified maximum or 
by the variation, extension or curtailment of the route or routes or the area specified in the permit shall be 
treated as an application for the grant of a new permit: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary so to treat an application made by the holder of stage carriage 
permit who provides the only service on any route to increase the frequency of the service so provided 
without any increase in the number of vehicles:  
Provided further that,— 
(i) in the case of variation, the termini shall not be altered and the distance covered by the 
variation shall not exceed twenty-four kilometres; 
(ii) in the case of extension, the distance covered by extension shall not exceed twenty-four 
kilometres from the termini, 
and any such variation or extension within such limits shall be made only after the transport authority is 
satisfied that such variation will serve the convenience of the public and that it is not expedient to grant a 
separate permit in respect of the original route as so varied or extended or any part thereof. 
(4) A 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 66] may, before such date as may be specified by it in this behalf, replace 
any permit granted by it before the said date by a fresh permit conforming to the provisions of section 72 
or section 74 or section 76 or section 79, as the case may be, and the fresh permit shall be valid for the 
same route or routes or the same area for which the replaced permit was valid: 
Provided that no condition other than a condition which was already attached to the replaced permit 
or which could have been attached thereto under the law in force when that permit was granted shall be 
attached to the fresh permit except with the consent in writing of the holder of the permit. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 81, a permit issued under the provisions of  
sub-section (4) shall be effective without renewal for the remainder of the period during which the 
replaced permit would have been so effective. 
81. Duration and renewal of permits.—(1) A permit other than a temporary permit issued under 
section 87 or a special permit issued under sub-section (8) of section 88 shall be effective 2[from the date 
of issuance or renewal thereof] for a period of five years: 
Provided that where the permit is countersigned under sub-section (1) of section 88, such 
countersignature shall remain effective without renewal for such period so as to synchronise with the 
validity of the primary permit. 
(2) A permit may be renewed on an application made not less than fifteen days before the date of its 
expiry. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Regional Transport Authority or the 
State Transport Authority, as the case may be, may entertain an application for the renewal of a permit 
after the last date specified in that sub-section if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by good 
and sufficient cause from making an application within the time specified. 
(4) The Regional Transport Authority or the State Transport Authority, as the case may be, may reject 
an application for the renewal of a permit on one or more of the following grounds, namely:— 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 25, for “Regional Transport Authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for “without renewal” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

59 
 
(a) the financial condition of the applicant as evidenced by insolvency, or decrees for payment of 
debts remaining unsatisfied for a period of thirty days, prior to the date of consideration of the 
application; 
(b) the applicant had been punished twice or more for any of the following offences within twelve 
months reckoned from fifteen days prior to the date of consideration of the application committed as a 
result of the operation of a stage carriage service by the applicant, namely:— 
(i) plying any vehicle— 
(1) without payment of tax due on such vehicle; 
(2) without payment of tax during the grace period allowed for payment of such tax and 
then stop the plying of such vehicle; 
(3) on any unauthorised route; 
(ii) making unauthorised trips: 
Provided that in computing the number of punishments for the purpose of clause (b), any punishment 
stayed by the order of an appellate authority shall not be taken into account: 
Provided further that no application under this sub-section shall be rejected unless an opportunity of 
being heard is given to the applicant. 
(5) Where a permit has been renewed under this section after the expiry of the period thereof, such 
renewal shall have effect from the date of such expiry irrespective of whether or not a temporary permit 
has been granted under clause (d) of section 87, and where a temporary permit has been granted, the fee 
paid in respect of such temporary permit shall be refunded. 
82. Transfer of permit.—(1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), a permit shall not be transferable 
from one person to another except with the permission of the transport authority which granted the permit 
and shall not, without such permission, operate to confer on any person to whom a vehicle covered by the 
permit is transferred any right to use that vehicle in the manner authorised by the permit. 
(2) Where the holder of a permit dies, the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicle covered 
by the permit may, for a period of three months, use the permit as if it had been granted to himself: 
Provided that such person has, within thirty days of the death of the holder, informed the transport 
authority which granted the permit of the death of the holder and of his own intention to use the permit: 
Provided further that no permit shall be so used after the date on which it would have ceased to be 
effective without renewal in the hands of the deceased holder. 
(3) The transport authority may, on application made to it within three months of the death of the 
holder of a permit, transfer the permit to the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicles covered 
by the permit: 
Provided that the transport authority may entertain an application made after the expiry of the said 
period of three months if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by good and sufficient cause from 
making an application within the time specified. 
83. Replacement of vehicles.—The holder of a permit may, with the permission of the authority by 
which the permit was granted, replace any vehicle covered by the permit by any other vehicle of the same 
nature. 
84. General conditions attaching to all permits.—The following shall be conditions of every 
permit— 
(a) that the vehicle to which the permit relates carries valid certificate of fitness issued under 
section 56 and is at all times so maintained as to comply with the requirements of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder; 
(b) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven at a speed exceeding the speed 
permitted under this Act; 

60 
 
(c) that any prohibition or restriction imposed and any fares or freight fixed by notification made 
under section 67 are observed in connection with the vehicle to which the permit relates; 
(d) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven in contravention of the provisions of 
section 5 or section 113; 
(e) that the provisions of this Act limiting the hours of work of drivers are observed in connection 
with any vehicle or vehicles to which the permit relates; 
(f) that the provisions of Chapters X, XI and XII so far as they apply to the holder of the permit 
are observed; and 
(g) that the name and address of the operator shall be painted or otherwise firmly affixed to every 
vehicle to which the permit relates on the exterior of the body of that vehicle on both sides thereof in 
a colour or colours vividly contrasting to the colour of the vehicle centered as high as practicable 
below the window line in bold letters. 
85. General form of permits.—Every permit issued under this Act shall be complete in itself and 
shall contain all the necessary particulars of the permit and the conditions attached thereto. 
86. Cancellation and suspension of permits.—(1) The transport authority which granted a permit 
may cancel the permit or may suspend it for such period as it thinks fit— 
(a) on the breach of any condition specified in section 84 or of any condition contained in the 
permit, or  
(b) if the holder of the permit uses or causes or allows a vehicle to be used in any manner not 
authorised by the permit, or 
(c) if the holder of the permit ceases to own the vehicle covered by the permit, or 
(d) if the holder of the permit has obtained the permit by fraud or misrepresentation, or 
(e) if the holder of the goods carriage permit, fails without reasonable cause, to use the vehicle for 
the purposes for which the permit was granted, or 
(f) if the holder of the permit acquires the citizenship of any foreign country: 
Provided that no permit shall be suspended or cancelled unless an opportunity has been given to the 
holder of the permit to furnish his explanation. 
(2) The transport authority may exercise the powers conferred on it under sub-section (1) in relation 
to a permit granted by any authority or person to whom power in this behalf has been delegated under 
sub-section (5) of section 68 as if the said permit was a permit granted by the transport authority. 
(3) Where a transport authority cancels or suspends a permit, it shall give to the holder in writing its 
reasons for the action taken. 
(4) The powers exercisable under sub-section (1) (other than the power to cancel a permit) by the 
transport authority which granted the permit may be exercised by any authority or person to whom such 
powers have been delegated under sub-section (5) of section 68. 
(5) Where a permit is liable to be cancelled or suspended under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (e) 
of sub-section (1) and the transport authority is of opinion that having regard to the circumstances of the 
case, it would not be necessary or expedient so to cancel or suspend the permit if the holder of the permit 
agrees to pay a certain sum of money, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
transport authority may, instead of cancelling or suspending the permit, as the case may be, recover from 
the holder of the permit the sum of money agreed upon. 
(6) The powers exercisable by the transport authority under sub-section (5) may, where an appeal has 
been preferred under section 89, be exercised also by the appellate authority. 
(7) In relation to a permit referred to in sub-section (9) of section 88, the powers exercisable under 
sub-section (1) (other than the power to cancel a permit) by the transport authority which granted the 
permit, may be exercised by any transport authority and any authority or persons to whom power in this 

61 
 
behalf has been delegated under sub-section (5) of section 68, as if the said permit was a permit granted 
by any such authority or persons. 
87. Temporary permits.—(1) A Regional Transport Authority and the State Transport Authority 
may without following the procedure laid down in section 80, grant permits, to be effective for a limited 
period which shall, not in any case exceed four months, to authorise the use of a transport vehicle 
temporarily— 
(a) for the conveyance of passengers on special occasions such as to and from fairs and religious 
gatherings, or  
(b) for the purposes of a seasonal business, or 
(c) to meet a particular temporary need, or 
(d) pending decision on an application for the renewal of a permit,  
and may attach to any such permit such condition as it may think fit: 
Provided that a Regional Transport Authority or, as the case may be, State Transport Authority may, 
in the case of goods carriages, under the circumstances of an exceptional nature, and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, grant a permit for a period exceeding four months, but not exceeding one year. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a temporary permit may be granted 
thereunder in respect of any route or area where— 
(i) no permit could be issued under section 72 or section 74 or section 76 or section 79 in respect 
of that route or area by reason of an order of a court or other competent authority restraining the issue 
of the same, for a period not exceeding the period for which the issue of the permit has been so 
restrained; or 
(ii) as a result of the suspension by a court or other competent authority of the permit of any 
vehicle in respect of that route or area, there is no transport vehicle of the same class with a valid 
permit in respect of that route or area, or there is no adequate number of such vehicles in respect of 
that route or area, for a period not exceeding the period of such suspension: 
Provided that the number of transport vehicles in respect of which temporary permits are so granted 
shall not exceed the number of vehicles in respect of which the issue of the permits have been restrained 
or, as the case may be, the permit has been suspended. 
88. Validation of permits for use outside region in which granted.—(1) Except as may be 
otherwise prescribed, a permit granted by the Regional Transport Authority of any one region shall not be 
valid in any other region, unless the permit has been countersigned by the Regional Transport Authority 
of that other rigion, and a permit granted in any one State shall not be valid in any other State unless 
countersigned by the State Transport Authority of that other State or by the Regional Transport Authority 
concerned: 
Provided that a goods carriage permit, granted by the Regional Transport Authority of any one 
region, for any area in any other region or regions within the same State shall be valid in that area without 
the countersignature of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or of each of the other 
regions concerned: 
Provided further that where both the starting point and the terminal point of a route are situate within 
the same State, but part of such route lies in any other State and the length of such part does not exceed 
sixteen kilometres, the permit shall be valid in the other State in respect of that part of the route which is 
in that other State notwithstanding that such permit has not been countersigned by the State Transport 
Authority or the Regional Transport Authority of that other State: 
Provided also that— 
(a) where a motor vehicle covered by a permit granted in one State is to be used for the purposes 
of defence in any other State, such vehicle shall display a certificate, in such form, and issued by such 
Authority, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, to the 

62 
 
effect that the vehicle shall be used for the period specified therein exclusively for the purposes of 
defence; and 
(b) any such permit shall be valid in that other State notwithstanding that such permit has not 
been countersigned by the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority of that other 
State. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a permit granted or countersigned by a 
State Transport Authority shall be valid in the whole State or in such regions within the State as may be 
specified in the permit. 
(3) A Regional Transport Authority when countersigning the permit may attach to the permit any 
condition which it might have imposed if it had granted the permit and may likewise vary any condition 
attached to the permit by the authority by which the permit was granted. 
(4) The provisions of this Chapter relating to the grant, revocation and suspension of permits shall 
apply to the grant, revocation and suspension of countersignatures of permits: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to follow the procedure laid down in section 80 for the grant of 
countersignatures of permits, where the permits granted in any one State are required to be countersigned 
by the State Transport Authority of another State or by the Regional Transport Authority concerned as a 
result of any agreement arrived at between the States after complying with the requirements of  
sub-section (5). 
(5) Every proposal to enter into an agreement between the States to fix the number of permits which 
is proposed to be granted or countersigned in respect of each route or area, shall be published by each of 
the State Governments concerned in the Official Gazette and in any one or more of the newspapers in 
regional language circulating in the area or route proposed to be covered by the agreement together with a 
notice of the date before which representations in connection therewith may be submitted, and the date 
not being less than thirty days from the date of publication in the Official Gazette, on which, and the 
authority by which, and the time and place at which, the proposal and any representation received in 
connection therewith will be considered. 
(6) Every agreement arrived at between the States shall, in so far as it relates to the grant of 
countersignature of permits, be published by each of the State Governments concerned in the Official 
Gazette and in any one or more of the newspapers in the regional language circulating in the area or route 
covered by the agreement and the State Transport Authority of the State and the Regional Transport 
Authority concerned shall give effect to it. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a Regional Transport Authority of one 
region may issue a temporary permit under section 87 to be valid in another region or State with the 
concurrence, given generally or for the particular occasion, of the Regional Transport Authority of that 
other region or of the State Transport Authority of that other State, as the case may be. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), but subject to any rules that may be made 
under this Act by the Central Government, the Regional Transport Authority of any one region or, as the 
case may be, the State Transport Authority, may, for the convenience of the public, 1[grant a special 
permit to any public service vehicle including any vehicle covered] by a permit issued under section 72 
(including a reserve stage carriage) or under section 74 or under sub-section (9) of this section for 
carrying a passenger or passengers for hire or reward under a contract, express or implied, for the use of 
the vehicle as a whole without stopping to pick up or set down along the line of route passengers not 
included in the contract, and in every case where such special permit is granted, the Regional Transport 
Authority shall assign to the vehicle, for display thereon, a special distinguishing mark in the form and 
manner specified by the Central Government and such special permit shall be valid in any other region or 
State without the countersignature of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or of the State 
Transport Authority of the other State, as the case may be. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 27, for “grant a special permit in relation to a vehicle covered” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

63 
 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) but subject to any rules that may be made 
by the Central Government under sub-section (14), any State Transport Authority may, for the purpose of 
promoting tourism, grant permits in respect of tourist vehicles valid for the whole of India, or in such 
contiguous States not being less than three in number including the State in which the permit is issued as 
may be specified in such permit in accordance with the choice indicated in the application and the 
provisions of sections 73, 74, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 1[clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 87 and 
section 89] shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such permits. 
2*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
        * 
(11) The following shall be conditions of every permit granted under sub-section (9), namely:— 
(i) every motor vehicle in respect of which such permit is granted shall conform to such 
description, requirement regarding the seating capacity, standards of comforts, amenities and other 
matters, as the Central Government may specify in this behalf; 
(ii) every such motor vehicle shall be driven by a person having such qualifications and satisfying 
such conditions as may be specified by the Central Government; and 
(iii) such other conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), but, subject to the rules that may be made 
by the Central Government under sub-section (14), the appropriate authority may, for the purpose of 
encouraging long distance inter-State road transport, grant in a State, national permits in respect of goods 
carriages and the provisions of sections 69, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 1[clause (d) of  
sub-section (1) of section 87 and section 89] shall, as far as may be, apply to or in relation to the grant of 
national permits. 
3*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
        * 
(14) (a) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the provisions of this section.  
(b) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) the authorisation fee payable for the issue of a permit referred to in sub-sections (9) and (12); 
(ii) the fixation of the laden weight of the motor vehicle; 
(iii) the distinguishing particulars or marks to be carried or exhibited in or on the motor vehicle; 
(iv) the colour or colours in which the motor vehicle is to be painted; 
(v) such other matters as the appropriate authority shall consider in granting a national permit. 
Explanation.—In this section,— 
(a) “appropriate authority”, in relation to a national permit, means the authority which is 
authorised under this Act to grant a goods carriage permit; 
(b) “authorisation fee” means the annual fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees, which may be 
charged by the appropriate authority of a State to enable a motor vehicle, covered by the permit 
referred to in sub-sections (9) and (12) to be used in other States subject to the payment of taxes or 
fees, if any, levied by the States concerned; 
(c) “national permit” means a permit granted by the appropriate authority to goods carriages to 
operate throughout the territory of India or in such contiguous States, not being less than four in 
number, including the State in which the permit is issued as may be specified in such permit in 
accordance with the choice indicated in the application. 
 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 27, for “and 89” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Sub-section (10) omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Sub-section (13) omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

64 
 
1[88A. Power of Central Government to make schemes for national, multimodal and inter-State 
transport of passengers and goods.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, modify any permit issued under this Act or 
make schemes for national, multimodal and inter-State transportation of goods or passengers, and issue or 
modify licences under, such scheme for the following purposes, namely:— 
(a) last mile connectivity; 
(b) rural transport; 
(c) improving the movement of freight, and logistics; 
(d) better utilisation of transportation assets; 
(e) the enhancement to the economic vitality of the area, especially by enabling competitiveness, 
productivity and efficiency; 
(f) the increase in the accessibility and mobility of people; 
(g) the protection and enhancement of the environment; 
(h) the promotion of energy conservation; 
(i) improvement of the quality of life; 
(j) enhancement of the integration and connectivity of the transportation system, across and 
between modes of transport; and 
(k) such other matters as the Central Government may deem fit: 
Provided that the Central Government may, before taking any action under this sub-section seek 
concurrence of the State Governments. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), two or more States may make schemes for 
the operation within such States for the inter-State transportation of goods or passengers: 
Provided that in the event of any repugnancy between the schemes made by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) and schemes made by two or more States under this sub-section, the schemes made 
under sub-section (1) shall prevail.] 
89. Appeals.—(1) Any person— 
(a) aggrieved by the refusal of the State or a Regional Transport Authority to grant a permit, or by 
any condition attached to a permit granted to him, or 
(b) aggrieved by the revocation or suspension of the permit or by any variation of the conditions 
thereof, or 
(c) aggrieved by the refusal to transfer the permit under section 82, or 
(d) aggrieved by the refusal of the State or a Regional Transport Authority to countersign a 
permit, or by any condition attached to such countersignature, or 
(e) aggrieved by the refusal of renewal of a permit, or  
(f) aggrieved by the refusal to grant permission under section 83, or 
(g) aggrieved by any other order which may be prescribed,  
may, within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner, appeal to the State Transport Appellate 
Tribunal constituted under sub-section (2), who shall, after giving such person and the original authority 
an opportunity of being heard, give a decision thereon which shall be final. 
2[(2) The State Government shall constitute such number of Transport Appellate Tribunals as 
it thinks fit and each such Tribunal shall consist of a judicial officer who is not below the rank of a 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 28, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

65 
 
District Judge or who is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court and it shall exercise jurisdiction 
within such area as may be notified by that Government.] 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), every appeal pending at 
the commencement of this Act, shall continue to be proceeded with and disposed of as if this Act had not 
been passed. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that when any order is made by the 
State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority in pursuance of a direction issued by the 
Inter-State Transport Commission under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 63A of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, and any 
person feels aggrieved by such order on the ground that it is not in consonance with such direction, he 
may appeal under sub-section (1) to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal against such order but not 
against the direction so issued. 
90. Revision.—The State Transport Appellate Tribunal may, on an application made to it, call for the 
record of any case in which an order has been made by a State Transport Authority or Regional Transport 
Authority against which no appeal lies, and if it appears to the State Transport Authority Appellate 
Tribunal that the order made by the State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority is 
improper or illegal, the State Transport Appellate Tribunal may pass such order in relation to the case as it 
deems fit and every such order shall be final: 
Provided that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal shall not entertain any application from a person 
aggrieved by an order of a State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority, unless the 
application is made within thirty days from the date of the order: 
Provided further that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal may entertain the application after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by good and 
sufficient cause from making the application in time: 
Provided also that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal shall not pass an order under this section 
prejudicial to any person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
91. Restriction of hours of work of drivers.—1[(1) The hours of work of any person engaged for 
operating a transport vehicle shall be such as provided in the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961  
(27 of 1961).] 
(2) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, grant such exemptions from the 
provisions of sub-section (1) as it thinks fit, to meet cases of emergency or of delays by reason of 
circumstances which could not be foreseen. 
(3) A State Government or, if authorised in this behalf by the State Government by rules made under 
section 96, the State or a Regional Transport Authority may require persons employing any person whose 
work is subject to any of the provisions of sub-section (1) to fix beforehand the hours of work of such 
persons so as to conform to those provisions, and may provide for the recording of the hours so fixed. 
(4) No person shall work or shall cause or allow any other person to work outside the hours fixed or 
recorded for the work of such persons under sub-section (3). 
(5) A State Government may prescribe the circumstances under which and the period during which 
the driver of a vehicle although not engaged in work is required to remain on or near the vehicle may be 
deemed to be an interval for rest within the meaning of sub-section (1).  
92. Voidance of contracts restrictive of liability.—Any contract for the conveyance of a passenger 
in a 2[transport vehicle, in respect of which a permit or licence] has been issued under this Chapter, shall, 
so far as it purports to negative or restrict the liability of any person in respect of any claim made against 
that person in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, the passenger while being carried in, entering or 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 29, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 35, for “stage carriage or contract carriage, in respect of which a permit” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

66 
 
alighting from the vehicle, or purports to impose any conditions with respect to the enforcement of any 
such liability, be void. 
93. 1[Agent or canvasser or aggregator to obtain licence.]— (1) No person shall engage himself— 
(i) as an agent or a canvasser, in the sale of tickets for travel by public service vehicles or in 
otherwise soliciting custom for such vehicles; or 
(ii) as an agent in the business of collecting, forwarding or distributing goods carried by goods 
carriages;  
2[(iii) as an aggregator,] 
unless he has obtained a licence from such authority and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the State Government. 
2[Provided that while issuing the licence to an aggregator the State Government may follow such 
guidelines as may be issued by the Central Government:  
Provided further that every aggregator shall comply with the provisions of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the rules and regulations made thereunder.] 
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) may include all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the period for which a licence may be granted or renewed; 
(b) the fee payable for the issue or renewal of the licence; 
(c) the deposit of security— 
(i) of a sum not exceeding rupees fifty thousand in the case of an agent in the business of 
collecting, forwarding or distributing goods carried by goods carriages; 
(ii) of a sum not exceeding rupees five thousand in the case of any other agent or canvasser,  
and the circumstances under which the security may be forfeited; 
(d) the provision by the agent of insurance of goods in transit; 
(e) the authority by which and the circumstances under which the licence may be suspended or 
revoked; 
(f) such other conditions as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(3) It shall be a condition of every licence that no agent or canvasser to whom the licence is granted 
shall advertise in any newspaper, book, list, classified directory or other publication unless there is 
contained in such advertisement appearing in such newspapers, book, list, classified directory or other 
publication the licence number, the date of expiry of licence and the particulars of the authority which 
granted the licence. 
94. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts.—No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
question relating to the grant of a permit 3[or licence issued under any scheme] under this Act, and no 
injunction in respect of any action taken or to be taken by the duly constituted authorities under this Act 
with regard to the grant of a permit 3[or licence issued under any scheme], shall be entertained by any 
Civil Court. 
95. Power of State Government to make rules as to stage carriages and contract carriages.—(1) 
A State Government may make rules to regulate, in respect of stage carriages and contract carriages and 
the conduct of passengers in such vehicles. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such rules may— 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 36, for the marginal heading “Agent or canvasser to obtain licence” (w.e.f. 27-11-2020). 
2. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-11-2020). 
3. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

67 
 
(a) authorise the removal from such vehicle of any person contravening the rules by the driver or 
conductor of the vehicle, or, on the request of the driver or conductor, or any passenger, by any police 
officer; 
(b) require a passenger who is reasonably suspected by the driver or conductor of contravening 
the rules to give his name and address to a police officer or to the driver or conductor on demand; 
(c) require a passenger to declare, if so demanded by the driver or conductor, the journey he 
intends to take or has taken in the vehicle and to pay the fare for the whole of such journey and to 
accept any ticket issued therefor; 
(d) require, on demand being made for the purpose by the driver or conductor or other person 
authorised by the owners of the vehicle, production during the journey and surrender at the end of the 
journey by the holder thereof of any ticket issued to him; 
(e) require a passenger, if so requested by the driver or conductor, to leave the vehicle on the 
completion of the journey the fare for which he has paid; 
(f) require the surrender by the holder thereof on the expiry of the period for which it is issued of 
a ticket issued to him; 
(g) require a passenger to abstain from doing anything which is likely to obstruct or interfere with 
the working of the vehicle or to cause damage to any part of the vehicle or its equipment or to cause 
injury or discomfort to any other passenger; 
(h) require a passenger not to smoke in any vehicle on which a notice prohibiting smoking is 
exhibited; 
(i) require the maintenance of complaint books in stage carriages and prescribe the conditions 
under which passengers can record any complaints in the same. 
96. Power of State Government to make rules for the purposes of this Chapter.—(1) A State 
Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules under this section may be made 
with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) the period of appointment and the terms of appointment of and the conduct of business by 
Regional and State Transport Authorities and the reports to be furnished by them; 
(ii) the conduct of business by any such authority in the absence of any member (including the 
Chairman) thereof and the nature of business which, the circumstances under which and the manner 
in which, business could be so conducted; 
(iii) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees; 
(iv) the forms to be used for the purposes of this Chapter, including the forms of permits; 
(v) the issue of copies of permits in place of permits lost, destroyed or multilated; 
(vi) the documents, plates and marks to be carried by transport vehicles, the manner in which they 
are to be carried and the languages in which any such documents are to be expressed; 
(vii) the fees to be paid in respect of applications for permits, duplicate permits and plates; 
(viii) the exemption of prescribed persons or prescribed classes of persons from payment of all or 
any or any portion of the fees payable under this Chapter; 
(ix) the custody, production and cancellation on revocation or expiration of permits, and the 
return of permits which have been cancelled; 
(x) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a permit granted in another State 
shall be valid in the State without countersignature; 

68 
 
(xi) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a permit granted in one region shall 
be valid in another region within the State without countersignature; 
(xii) the conditions to be attached to permits for the purpose of giving effect to any agreement 
such as is referred to in clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 67; 
(xiii) the authorities to whom, the time within which and the manner in which appeals may be 
made; 
(xiv) the construction and fittings of, and the equipment to be carried by, stage and contract 
carriage, whether generally or in specified areas; 
(xv) the determination of the number of passengers a stage or contract carriage is adapted to carry 
and the number which may be carried; 
(xvi) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried on stage and contract carriages partly 
or wholly in lieu of passengers; 
(xvii) the safe custody and disposal of property left in a stage or contract carriage; 
(xviii) regulating the painting or marking of transport vehicles and the display of advertising 
matter thereon, and in particular prohibiting the painting or marking of transport vehicles in such 
colour or manner as to induce any person to believe that the vehicle is used for the transport of mails; 
(xix) the conveyance in stage or contract carriages of corpses or persons suffering from any 
infectious or contagious disease or goods likely to cause discomfort or injury to passengers and the 
inspection and disinfection of such carriages; if used for such purposes; 
(xx) the provision of taxi meters on motor cabs requiring approval or standard types of taxi meters 
to be used and examining testing and sealing taxi meters; 
(xxi) prohibiting the picking up or setting down of passengers by stage or contract carriages at 
specified places or in specified areas or at places other than duly notified stands or halting places and 
requiring the driver of a stage carriage to stop and remain stationary for a reasonable time when so 
required by a passenger desiring to board or alight from the vehicle at a notified halting place; 
(xxii) the requirements which shall be complied with in the construction or use of any duly 
notified stand or halting place, including the provision of adequate equipment and facilities for the 
convenience of all users thereof; the fees, if any, which may be charged for the use of such facilities, 
the records which shall be maintained at such stands or places, the staff to be employed thereat, and 
the duties and conduct of such staff, and generally for maintaining such stands and places in a 
serviceable and clean condition; 
(xxiii) the regulation of motor cab ranks; 
(xxiv) requiring the owners of transport vehicles to notify any change of address or to report the 
failure of or damage to any vehicle used for the conveyance of passengers for hire or reward; 
(xxv) authorising specified persons to enter at all reasonable times and inspect all premises used 
by permit holders for the purposes of their business; 
(xxvi) requiring the person in charge of a stage carriage to carry any person tendering the legal or 
customary fare; 
(xxvii) the conditions under which and the types of containers or vehicles in which animals or 
birds may be carried and the seasons during which animals or birds may or may not be carried; 
(xxviii) the licensing of and the regulation of the conduct of agents or canvassers who engage in 
the sale of tickets for travel by public service vehicles or otherwise solicit custom for such vehicles; 
(xxix) the licensing of agents engaged in the business of collecting for forwarding and distributing 
goods carried by goods carriages; 
(xxx) the inspection of transport vehicles and their contents and of the permits relating to them; 
(xxxi) the carriage of persons other than the driver in goods carriages; 

69 
 
(xxxii) the records to be maintained and the returns to be furnished by the owners of transport 
vehicles; and 
1[(xxxiia) framing of schemes under sub-section (3) of section 67; 
(xxxiib) the promotion of effective competition, passenger convenience and safety, competitive 
fares and prevention of overcrowding;] 
(xxxiii) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS 
97. Definition.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “road transport service” 
means a service of motor vehicles carrying passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward. 
98. Chapter to override Chapter V and other laws.—The provisions of this Chapter and the rules 
and orders made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
in Chapter V or in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of 
any such law. 
99. Preparation and publication of proposal regarding road transport service of a State 
transport undertaking.—2[(1)] Where any State Government is of opinion that for the purpose of 
providing an efficient, adequate, economical and properly co-ordinated road transport service, it is 
necessary in the public interest that road transport services in general or any particular class of such 
service in relation to any area or route or portion thereof should be run and operated by the State transport 
undertaking, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of other persons or otherwise, the State 
Government may formulate a proposal regarding a scheme giving particulars of the nature of the services 
proposed to be rendered, the area or route proposed to be covered and other relevant particulars respecting 
thereto and shall publish such proposal in the Official Gazette of the State formulating such proposal and 
in not less than one newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or route proposed to be 
covered by such scheme and also in such other manner as the State Government formulating such 
proposal deem fit. 
3[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when a proposal is published under that 
sub-section, then from the date of publication of such proposal, no permit shall be granted to any person, 
except a temporary permit during the pendency of the proposal and such temporary permit shall be valid 
only for a period of one year from the date of its issue of till the date of final publication of the scheme 
under section 100, whichever is earlier.] 
100. Objection to the proposal.—(1) On the publication of any proposal regarding a scheme in the 
Official Gazette and in not less than one newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or 
route which is to be covered by such proposal any person may, within thirty days from the date of its 
publication in the Official Gazette, file objections to it before the State Government. 
(2) The State Government may, after considering the objections and after giving an opportunity to the 
objector or his representatives and the representatives of the State transport undertaking to be heard in the 
matter, if they so desire, approve or modify such proposal. 
(3) The scheme relating to the proposal as approved or modified under sub-section (2) shall then be 
published in the Official Gazette by the State Government making such scheme and in not less than one 
newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or route covered by such scheme and the same 
shall thereupon become final on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette and shall be called the 
approved scheme and the area or route to which it relates shall be called the notified area or notified 
route: 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Section 99 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act of 54 of 1994, s. 30 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

70 
 
Provided that no such scheme which relates to any inter-State route shall be deemed to be an 
approved scheme unless it has the previous approval of the Central Government. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a scheme is not published as an 
approved scheme under sub-section (3) in the Official Gazette within a period of one year from the date 
of publication of the proposal regarding the scheme in the Official Gazette under sub-section (1), the 
proposal shall be deemed to have lapsed. 
Explanation.—In computing the period of one year referred to in this sub-section, any period or 
periods during which the publication of the approved scheme under sub-section (3) was held up on 
account of any stay or injunction by the order of any court shall be excluded. 
101. Operation of additional services by a State transport undertaking in certain 
circumstances.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 87, a State transport undertaking may, in 
the public interest operate additional services for the conveyance of the passengers on special occasions 
such as to and from fairs and religious gatherings: 
Provided that the State transport undertaking shall inform about the operation of such additional 
services to the concerned Transport Authority without delay. 
102. Cancellation or modification of scheme.—(1) The State Government may, at any time, if it 
considers necessary, in the public interest so to do, modify any approved scheme after giving— 
(i) the State transport undertaking; and 
(ii) any other person who, in the opinion of the State Government, is likely to be affected by the 
proposed modification, 
an opportunity of being heard in respect of the proposed modification. 
(2) The State Government shall publish any modification proposed under sub-section (1) in the 
Official Gazette and in one of the newspapers in the regional languages circulating in the area in which it 
is proposed to be covered by such modification, together with the date, not being less than thirty days 
from such publication in the Official Gazette, and the time and place at which any representation received 
in this behalf will be heard by the State Government. 
103. Issue of permits to State transport undertakings.—(1) Where, in pursuance of an approved 
scheme, any State transport undertaking applies in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in this behalf for a stage carriage permit or a goods carriage permit or a contract carriage 
permit in respect of a notified area or notified route, the State Transport Authority in any case where the 
said area or route lies in more than one region and the Regional Transport Authority in any other case 
shall issue such permit to the State transport undertaking, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in Chapter V. 
(2) For the purpose of giving effect to the approved scheme in respect of a notified area or notified 
route, the State Transport Authority or, as the case may be, the Regional Transport Authority concerned 
may, by order,— 
(a) refuse to entertain any application for the grant or renewal of any other permit or reject any 
such application as may be pending; 
(b) cancel any existing permit; 
(c) modify the terms of any existing permit so as to— 
(i) render the permit ineffective beyond a specified date; 
(ii) reduce the number of vehicles authorised to be used under the permit; 
(iii) curtail the area or route covered by the permit in so far as such permit relates to the 
notified area or notified route. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no appeal shall lie against any action taken, or 
order passed, by the State Transport Authority or any Regional Transport Authority under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2). 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Karnataka 
Amendment of section 103.—In section 103 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 
1988), after sub-section (1), the following shall be inserted, namely:— 

71 
 
“(1A) It shall be lawful for the State Transport undertaking to operate on any route as stage carriage under any 
permit issued therefor to such undertaking under sub-section (1), any vehicle placed at the disposal and under the 
control of such undertaking by the owner of such vehicle under any arrangement entered into between such owner 
and the undertaking for the use of the said vehicle by the undertaking.] 
[Vide Karnataka Act 11 of 1996, sec. 2]. 
Haryana 
Amendment of section 103.—After sub-section (1) of section 103 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, State Transport Undertaking may operate on any route as 
Stage Carriage under any permit issued thereof to such undertaking under sub-section (1), any vehicle, placed at the 
disposal and under the control of such undertaking by the owner of such vehicle under any arrangement, entered into 
between such owner and the undertaking for the use of the said vehicle by the undertaking. 
[Vide Haryana Act 22 of 2018, sec. 2]. 
104. Restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route.—Where a scheme has 
been published under sub-section (3) of section 100 in respect of any notified area or notified route, the State 
Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, shall not grant any permit except in 
accordance with the provisions of the scheme: 
Provided that where no application for a permit has been made by the State transport undertaking in respect of 
any notified area or notified route in pursuance of an approved scheme, the State Transport Authority or the 
Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, may grant temporary permits to any person in respect of such 
notified area or notified route subject to the condition that such permit shall cease to be effective on the issue of a 
permit to the State transport undertaking in respect of that area or route.  
105. Principles and method of determining compensation and payment thereof.—(1) Where, in exercise of 
the powers conferred by clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 103, any existing permit is cancelled or 
the terms thereof are modified, there shall be paid by the State transport undertaking to the holder of the permit, 
compensation, the amount of which shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) or                     
sub-section (5), as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no compensation shall be payable on account of the 
cancellation of any existing permit or any modification of the terms thereof, when a permit for an alternative route 
or area in lieu thereof has been offered by the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the 
case may be and accepted by the holder of the permit. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no compensation shall be payable on account of the 
refusal to renew a permit under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 103. 
 (4) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (b) or sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of 
sub-section (2) of section 103, any existing permit is cancelled or the terms thereof are modified so as to prevent the 
holder of the permit from using any vehicle authorised to be used thereunder for the full period from which the 
permit, would otherwise have been effective, the compensation payable to the holder of the permit for each vehicle 
affected by such cancellation or modification shall be computed as follows:— 
(a) 
for every complete month or part of a month exceeding fifteen 
days of the unexpired period of the permit 
 
Two hundred rupees;                        
(b) 
for part of a month not exceeding fifteen days of the unexpired 
period of the permit 
                                                  
One hundred rupees: 
Provided that the amount of compensation shall, in no case, be less than four hundred rupees. 
(5) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 103, 
the terms of an existing permit are modified so as to curtail the area or route of any vehicle authorised to be used 
thereunder, the compensation payable to the holder of the permit on account of such curtailment shall be an amount 
computed in accordance with the following formula, namely:— 
Y   A 
R 
Explanation.—In this formula,— 
(i) “Y” means the length or area by which the route or area covered by the permit is curtailed; 
(ii) “A” means the amount computed in accordance with sub-section (4); 
(iii) “R” means the total length of the route or the total area covered by the permit. 
(6) The amount of compensation payable under this section shall be paid by the State transport undertaking to 
the person or persons entitled thereto within one month from the date on which the cancellation or modification of 
the permit becomes effective: 

72 
 
Provided that where the State transport undertaking fails to make the payment within the said period 
of one month, it shall pay interest at the rate of seven per cent. per annum from the date on which it falls 
due. 
106. Disposal of article found in vehicles.—Where any article found in any transport vehicle 
operated by the State transport undertaking is not claimed by its owner within the prescribed period, the 
State transport undertaking may sell the article in the prescribed manner and the sale proceeds thereof, 
after deducting the costs incidental to sale, shall be paid to the owner on demand. 
107. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the form in which any proposal regarding a scheme may be published under section 99; 
(b) the manner in which objections may be filed under sub-section (1) of section 100; 
(c) the manner in which objections may be considered and disposed of under sub-section (2) of 
section 100; 
(d) the form in which any approved scheme may be published under sub-section (3) of  
section 100;  
(e) the manner in which application under sub-section (1) of section 103 may be made; 
(f) the period within which the owner may claim any article found left in any transport vehicle 
under section 106 and the manner of sale of such article; 
(g) the manner of service of orders under this Chapter; 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
108. Certain powers of State Government exercisable by the Central Government.—The powers 
conferred on the State Government under this Chapter shall, in relation to a corporation or company 
owned or controlled by the Central Government or by the Central Government and one or more State 
Governments, be exercisable only by the Central Government in relation to an inter-State route or area. 
CHAPTER VII 
CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
109. General provision regarding construction and maintenance of vehicles.—(1) Every motor 
vehicle shall be so constructed and so maintained as to be at all times under the effective control of the 
person driving the vehicle. 
(2) Every motor vehicle shall be so constructed as to have right hand steering control unless it is 
equipped with a mechanical or electrical signalling device of a prescribed nature. 
1[(3) If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do 
in the public interest, it may by order published in the Official Gazette, notify that any article or 
process used by a manufacturer shall conform to such standard as may be specified in that order.] 
110. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may make rules 
regulating the construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers with respect to all 
or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the width, height, length and overhang of vehicles and of the loads carried; 
2[(b) the size, nature, maximum retail price and condition of tyres, including embossing thereon 
of date and year of manufacture and the maximum load carrying capacity;] 
(c) brakes and steering gear; 
(d) the use of safety glasses including prohibition of the use of tinted safety glasses; 
(e) signalling appliances, lamps and reflectors; 
(f) speed governors; 
 
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 31 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for clause (b) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

73 
 
(g) the emission of smoke, visible vapour, sparks, ashes, grit or oil; 
(h) the reduction of noise emitted by or caused by vehicles; 
(i) the embossment of chassis number and engine number and the date of manufacture; 
(j) safety belts, handle bars of motor cycles, auto-dippers and other equipments essential for 
safety of drivers, passengers and other road users; 
(k) standards of the components 1[including software] used in the vehicle as inbuilt safety 
devices; 
(l) provision for transportation of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life; 
(m) standards for emission of air pollutants; 
2[(n) installation of catalytic convertors in the class of vehicles to be prescribed; 
(o) the placement of audio-visual or radio or tape recorder type of devices in public vehicles; 
(p) warranty after sale of vehicle and norms therefor:] 
Provided that any rules relating to the matters dealing with the protection of environment, so far as 
may be, shall be made after consultation with the Ministry of the Government of India dealing with 
environment. 
(2) Rules may be made under sub-section (1) governing the matters mentioned therein, including the 
manner of ensuring the compliance with such matters and the maintenance of motor vehicles in respect of 
such matters, either generally in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or in respect of motor vehicles or 
trailers of a particular class or in particular circumstances 1[and such rules may lay down the procedure 
for investigation, the officers empowered to conduct such investigations, the procedure for hearing of 
such matters and the penalties to be levied thereunder.] 
1[(2A) Persons empowered under sub-section (2) to conduct investigations referred to in                 
sub-section (2) shall have all the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and  
(d) any other matter as may be prescribed.] 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,— 
(a) the Central Government may exempt any class of motor vehicles from the provisions of this 
Chapter; 
(b) a State Government may exempt any motor vehicle or any class or description of motor 
vehicles from the rules made under sub-section (1) subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government. 
3[110A. Recall of motor vehicles.—(1) The Central Government may, by order, direct a 
manufacturer to recall motor vehicles of a particular type or its variants, if— 
(a) a defect in that particular type of motor vehicle may cause harm to the environment or to the 
driver or occupants of such motor vehicle or other road users; and 
(b) a defect in that particular type of motor vehicle has been reported to the Central Government 
by— 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 32. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 40 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 

74 
 
(i) such percentage of owners, as the Central Government, may by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify; or 
(ii) a testing agency; or 
(iii) any other source. 
(2) Where the defect referred to in sub-section (1) lies in a motor vehicle component, the Central 
Government may, by order, direct a manufacturer to recall all motor vehicles which contain such 
component, regardless of the type or variants of such motor vehicle. 
(3) A manufacturer whose vehicles are recalled under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall— 
(a) reimburse the buyers for the full cost of the motor vehicle, subject to any hire-purchase or 
lease-hypothecation agreement; or 
(b) replace the defective motor vehicle with another motor vehicle of similar or better 
specifications which complies with the standards specified under this Act or repair it; and 
(c) pay such fines and other dues in accordance with sub-section (6). 
(4) Where a manufacturer notices a defect in a motor vehicle manufactured by him, he shall inform 
the Central Government of the defect and initiate recall proceedings and in such case the manufacturer 
shall not be liable to pay fine under sub-section (3). 
(5) The Central Government may authorise any officer to conduct investigation under this section 
who shall have all the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and 
(d) any other matter as may be prescribed. 
(6) The Central Government may make rules for regulating the recall of motor vehicles, of a 
particular type or its variants, for any defect which in the opinion of the Central Government, may cause 
harm to the environment or to the driver or occupants of such motor vehicle or to other road users. 
110B. Type approval certificate and testing agencies.— (1) No motor vehicle, including a trailer or 
semi-trailer or modular hydraulic trailer or side car shall be sold or delivered or offered for sale or 
delivery or used in a public place in India unless a type-approval certificate referred to in sub-section (2) 
has been issued in respect of such vehicle: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the 
requirement of type-approval certificate to other vehicles drawn or intended to be drawn by a motor 
vehicle: 
Provided further that such certificate shall not be required for vehicles which are— 
(a) intended for export or display or demonstration or exhibition; or 
(b) used by a manufacturer of motor vehicles or motor vehicle components or a research and 
development centre or a test by agency for testing and validation or for data collection, inside factory 
premises or in a non-public place; or 
(c) exempted by the Central Government. 
(2) The manufacturer or importer of motor vehicles including trailers, semi-trailers, modular 
hydraulic trailers and side cars shall submit the prototype of the vehicle to be manufactured or imported 
for test to a testing agency for obtaining a type-approval certificate by such agency. 
(3) The Central Government shall make rules for the accreditation, registration and regulation of 
testing agencies. 

75 
 
(4) The testing agencies shall conduct tests on vehicles drawn from the production line of the 
manufacturer or obtained otherwise to verify the conformity of such vehicles to the provisions of this 
Chapter and the rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(5) Where the motor vehicle having a type-approval certificate is recalled under section 110A, the 
testing agency which granted the certificate to such motor vehicle shall be liable for its accreditation and 
registration to be cancelled.] 
111. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules 
regulating the construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers with respect to all 
matters other than the matters specified in sub-section (1) of section 110. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules may be made under this section 
governing all or any of the following matters either generally in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or in 
respect of motor vehicles or trailers of a particular class or description or in particular circumstances, 
namely:— 
(a) seating arrangements in public service vehicles and the protection of passengers against the 
weather; 
(b) prohibiting or restricting the use of audible signals at certain times or in certain places; 
(c) prohibiting the carrying of appliances likely to cause annoyance or danger; 
(d) the periodical testing and inspection of vehicles by prescribed authorities 1[and fees to be 
charged for such test]; 
(e) the particulars other than registration marks to be exhibited by vehicles and the manner in 
which they shall be exhibited; 
(f) the use of trailers with motor vehicles; and 
2* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
     * 
CHAPTER VIII 
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC 
112. Limits of speed.—(1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle or cause or allow a motor vehicle to 
be driven in any public place at a speed exceeding the maximum speed or below the minimum speed 
fixed for the vehicle under this Act or by or under any other law for the time being in force: 
Provided that such maximum speed shall in no case exceed the maximum fixed for any motor vehicle 
or class or description of motor vehicles by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette. 
(2) The State Government or any authority authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if 
satisfied that it is necessary to restrict the speed of motor vehicles in the interest of public safety or 
convenience or because of the nature of any road or bridge, by notification in the Official Gazette, and by 
causing appropriate traffic signs to be placed or erected under section 116 at suitable places, fix such 
maximum speed limits or minimum speed limits as it thinks fit for motor vehicles or any specified class 
or description of motor vehicles or for motor vehicles to which a trailer is attached, either generally or in 
a particular area or on a particular road or roads: 
Provided that no such notification is necessary if any restriction under this section is to remain in 
force for not more than one month. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any vehicle registered under section 60 while it is being used 
in the execution of military manoeuvres within the area and during the period specified in the notification 
under sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938  
(5 of 1938). 
 
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 33 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Clause (g) omitted by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

76 
 
113. Limits of weight and limitations on use.—(1) The State Government may prescribe the 
conditions for the issue of permits for 1[transport vehicles] by the State or Regional Transport Authorities 
and may prohibit or restrict the use of such vehicles in any area or route. 
(2) Except as may be otherwise prescribed, no person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any 
public place any motor vehicle which is not fitted with pneumatic tyres. 
(3) No person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any public place any motor vehicle or 
trailer— 
(a) the unladen weight of which exceeds the unladen weight specified in the certificate of 
registration of the vehicle, or 
(b) the laden weight of which exceeds the gross vehicle weight specified in the certificate of 
registration. 
(4) Where the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle or trailer driven in contravention of  
sub-section (2) or clause (a) of sub-section (3) is not the owner, a Court may presume that the offence 
was committed with the knowledge of or under the orders of the owner of the motor vehicle or trailer. 
114. Power to have vehicle weighed.—(1) 2[Any officer of the Motor Vehicles Department 3[or any 
other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government] shall, if he has reason to believe that a 
goods vehicle or trailor is being used in contravention of section 113] require the driver to convey the 
vehicle to a weighing device, if any, within a distance of ten kilometres from any point on the forward 
route or within a distance of twenty kilometres from the destination of the vehicle for weighment; and if 
on such weighment the vehicle is found to contravene in any respect the provisions of section 113 
regarding weight, he may, by order in writing, direct the driver to off-load the excess weight at his own 
risk and not to remove the vehicle or trailer from that place until the laden weight has been reduced or the 
vehicle or trailer has otherwise been dealt with so that it complies with section 113 and on receipt of such 
notice, the driver shall comply with such directions. 
(2) Where the person authorised under sub-section (1) makes the said order in writing, he shall also 
endorse the relevant details of the overloading on the goods carriage permit and also intimate the fact of 
such endorsement to the authority which issued that permit. 
115. Power to restrict the use of vehicles.—The State Government or any authority authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government, if satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of public safety or 
convenience, or because of the nature of any road or bridge, may by notification in the Official Gazette, 
prohibit or restrict, subject to such exceptions and conditions as may be specified in the notification, the 
driving of motor vehicles or of any specified class or description of motor vehicles or the use of trailers 
either generally in a specified area or on a specified road and when any such prohibition or restriction is 
imposed, shall cause appropriate traffic signs to be placed or erected under section 116 at suitable places: 
Provided that where any prohibition or restriction under this section is to remain in force for not more 
than one month, notification thereof in the Official Gazette shall not be necessary, but such local publicity 
as the circumstances may permit, shall be given of such prohibition or restriction. 
116. Power to erect traffic signs.—(1) (a) The State Government or any authority authorised in this 
behalf by the State Government may cause or permit traffic signs to be placed or erected in any public 
place for the purpose of bringing to public notice any speed limits fixed under sub-section (2) of  
section 112 or any prohibitions or restrictions imposed under section 115 or generally for the purpose of 
regulating motor vehicle traffic. 
(b) A State Government or any authority authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette or by the erection at suitable places of the appropriate traffic sign 
referred to in Part A of the Schedule, designate certain roads as main roads for the purposes of the driving 
regulations made by the Central Government. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 34, for “heavy goods vehicles or heavy passenger motor vehicles” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for certain words and figures (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 41, for “authorised in this behalf by the State Government” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

77 
 
1[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the National Highways Authority of 
India constituted under the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 (68 of 1988) or any other 
agency authorised by the Central Government, may cause or permit traffic signs, as provided in the First 
Schedule, to be placed or erected or removed on national highways for the purpose of regulating motor 
vehicle traffic and may order the removal of any sign or advertisement which in its opinion is so placed as 
to obscure any traffic sign from view or is so similar in appearance to a traffic sign as to mislead or is 
likely to distract the attention or concentration of the driver: 
Provided that for the purposes of this sub-section, the National Highway Authority of India or any 
other agency authorised by the Central Government may seek assistance from the authorities of the State 
Government and the said State Government shall provide such assistance.] 
(2) Traffic signs placed or erected under sub-section (1) for any purpose for which provision is made 
in the Schedule shall be of the size, colour and type and shall have the meanings set forth in the Schedule, 
but the State Government or any authority empowered in this behalf by the State Government may make 
or authorise the addition to any sign set forth in the said Schedule, of transcriptions of the words, letters or 
figures thereon in such script as the State Government may think fit, provided that the transcriptions shall 
be of similar size and colour to the words, letters or figures set forth in the Schedule. 
(3) Except as provided by sub-section (1) 1[or sub-section (1A)], no traffic sign shall, after the 
commencement of this Act, be placed or erected on or near any road; but all traffic signs placed or erected 
prior to the commencement of this Act by any competent authority shall for the purpose of this Act be 
deemed to be traffic signs placed or erected under the provisions of sub-section (1). 
(4) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, empower any police officer not 
below the rank of a Superintendent of Police to remove or cause to be removed any sign or advertisement 
which is so placed in his opinion as to obscure any traffic sign from view or any sign or advertisement 
which is in his opinion so similar in appearance to a traffic sign as to be misleading or which in his 
opinion is likely to distract the attention or concentration of the driver. 
(5) No person shall wilfully remove, alter, deface, or in any way tamper with, any traffic signs placed 
or erected under this section. 
(6) If any person accidentally causes such damage to a traffic sign as renders it useless for the purpose 
for which it is placed or erected under this section, he shall report the circumstances of the occurrence to a 
police officer or at a police station as soon as possible, and in any case within twenty-four hours of the 
occurrence. 
(7) For the purpose of bringing the signs set forth in 2[the First Schedule] in conformity with any 
International Convention relating to motor traffic to which the Central Government is for the time being a 
party, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make any addition or 
alteration to any such sign and on the issue of any such notification, 2[the First Schedule] shall be deemed 
to be amended accordingly. 
117. Parking places and halting stations.—The State Government or any authority authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government may, in consultation with the local authority having jurisdiction in 
the area concerned, determine places at which motor vehicles may stand either indefinitely or for a 
specified period of time, and may determine the places at which public service vehicles may stop for a 
longer time than is necessary for the taking up and setting down of passengers. 
3[Provided that the State Government or the authorised authority shall, give primacy to the safety of 
road users and the free flow of traffic in determining such places: 
Provided further that for the purpose of this section the National Highways Authority of India, 
constituted under the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 (68 of 1988) or any other agency 
authorised by the Central Government, may also determine such places.] 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 36, for “the Schedule” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 43 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

78 
 
118. Driving regulations.—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make regulations for the driving of motor vehicles. 
119. Duty to obey traffic signs.—(1) Every driver of a motor vehicle shall drive the vehicle in 
conformity with any indication given by mandatory traffic sign and in conformity with the driving 
regulations made by the Central Government, and shall comply with all directions given to him by any 
police officer for the time being engaged in the regulation of traffic in any public place. 
(2) In this section “mandatory traffic sign” means a traffic sign included in Part A of the Schedule, or 
any traffic sign of similar form (that is to say, consisting of or including a circular disc diplaying a device, 
word or figure and having a red ground or border) placed or erected for the purpose of regulating motor 
vehicle traffic under sub-section (1) of section 116. 
120. Vehicles with left hand control.—No person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any 
public place any motor vehicle with a left-hand steering control unless it is equipped with a mechanical or 
electrical signalling device of a prescribed nature and in working order. 
121. Signals and signalling devices.—The driver of a motor vehicle shall make such signals and on 
such occasions as may be prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that the signal of an intention to turn to the right or left or to stop— 
(a) in the case of a motor vehicle with a right-hand steering control, may be given by a 
mechanical or electrical device of a prescribed nature affixed to the vehicle; and 
(b) in the case of a motor vehicle with a left-hand steering control, shall be given by a mechanical 
or electrical device of a prescribed nature affixed to the vehicle: 
Provided further that the State Government may, having regard to the width and condition of the 
roads in any area or route, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt subject to such conditions as 
may be specified therein any motor vehicle or class or description of motor vehicles from the operation of 
this section for the purpose of plying in that area or route. 
122. Leaving vehicle in dangerous position.—No person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or 
allow the vehicle or any trailer to be abandoned or to remain at rest on any public place in such a position 
or in such a condition or in such circumstances as to cause or likely to cause danger, obstruction or undue 
inconvenience to other users of the public place or to the passengers. 
123. Riding on running board, etc.—(1) No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall 
carry any person or permit any person to be carried on the running board or otherwise than within the 
body of the vehicle. 
(2) No person shall travel on the running board or on the top or on the bonnet of a motor vehicle. 
124. Prohibition against travelling without pass or ticket.—No person shall enter or remain in any 
stage carriage for the purposes of travelling therein unless he has with him a proper pass or ticket: 
Provided that where arrangements for the supply of tickets are made in the stage carriage by which a 
person has to travel, a person may enter such stage carriage but as soon as may be after his entry therein, 
be shall make the payment of his fare to the conductor or the driver who performs the functions of a 
conductor and obtain from such conductor or driver, as the case may be, a ticket for his journey. 
Explanation.—In this section,— 
(a) “pass” means a duty, privilege or courtesy pass entitling the person to whom it is given to 
travel in a stage carriage gratuitously and includes a pass issued on payment for travel in a stage 
carriage for the period specified therein; 
(b) “ticket” includes a single ticket, a return ticket or a season ticket. 
125. Obstruction of driver.—No person driving a motor vehicle shall allow any person to stand or 
sit or to place anything in such a manner or position as to hamper the driver in his control of the vehicle. 

79 
 
126. Stationary vehicles.—No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or allow the 
vehicle to remain stationary in any public place, unless there is in the driver’s seat a person duly licensed 
to drive the vehicle or unless the mechanism has been stopped and a brake or brakes applied or such other 
measures taken as to ensure that the vehicle cannot accidentally be put in motion in the absence of the 
driver. 
127. Removal of motor vehicles abandoned or left unattended on a public place.—1[(1) Where 
any motor vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a public place for ten hours or more or is parked in a 
place where parking is legally prohibited, its removal by a towing service or its immobilisations by any 
means including wheel clamping may be authorised by a police officer in uniform having jurisdiction.] 
(2) Where an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burnt or partially dismantled vehicle is creating a 
traffic hazard, because of its position in relation to the 2[public place], or its physical appearance is 
causing the impediment to the traffic, its immediate removal from the 2[public place] by a towing service 
may be authorised by a police officer having jurisdiction. 
(3) Where a vehicle is authorised to be removed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by a police 
officer, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing costs, besides any other penalty.  
128. Safety measures for drivers and pillion riders.—(1) No driver of a two-wheeled motorcycle 
shall carry more than one person in addition to himself on the motorcycle and no such person shall be 
carried otherwise than sitting on a proper seat securely fixed to the motorcycle behind the driver’s seat 
with appropriate safety measures. 
(2) In addition to the safety measures mentioned in sub-section (1), the Central Government may, 
prescribe other safety measures for the drivers of two-wheeled motorcycles and pillion riders thereon. 
3[129. Wearing of protective headgear.— Every person, above four years of age, driving or riding 
or being carried on a motorcycle of any class or description shall, while in a public place, wear protective 
headgear conforming to such standards as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a person who is a Sikh, if, while driving 
or riding on the motorcycle, in a public place, he is wearing a turban:  
Provided further that the Central Government may by rules provide for measures for the safety of 
children below four years of age riding or being carried on a motorcycle. 
 Explanation.— “Protective headgear” means a helmet which,—  
(a) by virtue of its shape, material and construction, could reasonably be expected to afford to the 
person driving or riding on a motorcycle a degree of protection from injury in the event of an 
accident; and  
(b) is securely fastened to the head of the wearer by means of straps or other fastenings provided 
on the headgear.] 
130. Duty to produce licence and certificate of registration.—(1) The driver of a motor vehicle in 
any public place shall, on demand by any police officer in uniform, produce his licence for examination: 
Provided that the driver may, if his licence has been submitted to, or has been seized by, any officer 
or authority under this or any other Act, produce in lieu of the licence a receipt or other acknowledgment 
issued by such officer or authority in respect thereof and thereafter produce the licence within such 
period, in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe to the police officer making the 
demand. 
4[(2) The conductor, if any, of a motor vehicle on any public place shall on demand by any officer of 
the Motor Vehicles Department authorised in this behalf, produce the licence for examination.] 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 37, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “highway” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 44, for s. 129 (w.e.f. 15-02-2022). 
4. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 39, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

80 
 
1[(3) The owner of a motor vehicle (other than a vehicle registered under section 60), or in his 
absence the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle, shall, on demand by a registering authority or 
any other officer of the Motor Vehicles Department duly authorised in this behalf, produce the certificate 
of insurance of the vehicle and, where the vehicle is a transport vehicle, also the certificate of fitness 
referred to in section 56 and the permit; and if any or all of the certificates or the permit are not in his 
possession, he shall, within fifteen days from the date of demand, submit photo copies of the same, duly 
attested in person or send the same by registered post to the officer who demanded it. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “certificate of insurance” means the certificate 
issued under sub-section (3) of section 147.] 
(4) If the licence referred to in sub-section (2) or the certificates or permit referred to in  
sub-section (3), as the case may be, are not at the time in the possession of the person to whom demand is 
made, it shall be a sufficient compliance with this section if such person produces the licence or 
certificates or permit within such period in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe, to the 
police officer or authority making the demand: 
Provided that, except to such extent and with such modifications as may be prescribed, the provisions 
of this sub-section shall not apply to any person required to produce the certificate of registration or the 
certificate of fitness of a transport vehicle. 
131. Duty of the driver to take certain precautions at unguarded railway level crossings.—Every 
driver of a motor vehicle at the approach of any unguarded railway level crossing shall cause the vehicle 
to stop and the driver of the vehicle shall cause the conductor or cleaner or attendant or any other person 
in the vehicle to walk up to the level crossing and ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from 
either side and then pilot the motor vehicle across such level crossing, and where no conductor or cleaner 
or attendant or any other person is available in the vehicle, the driver of the vehicle shall get down from 
the vehicle himself to ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either side before the railway 
track is crossed. 
132. Duty of driver to stop in certain cases.—(1) The driver of a motor vehicle shall cause the 
vehicle to stop and remain stationary so long as 2[may for such reasonable time as may be necessary, but 
not exceeding twenty-four hours]— 
3[(a) when required to do so by any police officer not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector in 
 uniform, in the event of the vehicle being involved in the occurrence of an accident to a  person, 
animal or vehicle or of damage to property, or] 
(b) when required to do so by any person in charge of an animal if such person apprehends that 
the animal is, or being alarmed by the vehicle will become, unmanageable, or 
4* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
       * 
and he shall give his name and address and the name and address of the owner of the vehicle to any 
person affected by any such accident or damage who demands it provided such person also furnishes his 
name and address. 
(2) The driver of a motor vehicle shall, on demand by a person giving his own name and address and 
alleging that the driver has committed an offence punishable under section 184 give his name and address 
to that person. 
(3) In this section the expression “animal” means any horse, cattle, elephant, camel, ass, mule, sheep 
or goat. 
133. Duty of owner of motor vehicle to give information.—The owner of a motor vehicle, the 
driver or conductor of which is accused of any offence under this Act shall, on the demand of any police 
officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government, give all information regarding the name and 
address of, and the licence held by, the driver or conductor which is in his possession or could by 
reasonable diligence be ascertained by him. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 39, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “may reasonably be necessary” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for clause (a) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
4. Cl. (c) omitted by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

81 
 
134. Duty of driver in case of accident and injury to a person.—When any person is injured or any 
property of a third party is damaged, as a result of an accident in which a motor vehicle is involved, the 
driver of the vehicle or other person in charge of the vehicle shall— 
(a) unless it is not practicable to do so on account of mob fury or any other reason beyond his 
control, take all reasonable steps to secure medical attention for the injured person, 1[by conveying 
him to the nearest medical practitioner or hospital, and it shall be the duty of every registered medical 
practitioner or the doctor on the duty in the hospital immediately to attend to the injured person and 
render medical aid or treatment without waiting for any procedural formalities], unless the injured 
person or his guardian, in case he is a minor, desires otherwise; 
(b) give on demand by a police officer any information required by him, or, if no police officer is 
present, report the circumstances of the occurrence, including the circumstances, if any, for not taking 
reasonable steps to secure medical attention as required under clause (a), at the nearest police station 
as soon as possible, and in any case within twenty-four hours of the occurrence. 
2[(c) give the following information in writing to the insurer, who has issued the certificates of 
insurance, about the occurrence of the accident, namely:— 
(i) insurance policy number and period of its validity; 
(ii) date, time and place of accident; 
(iii) particulars of the persons injured or killed in the accident; 
(iv) name of the driver and the particulars of his driving licence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “driver” includes the owner of the 
vehicle.] 
3[134A. Protection of Good Samaritans.—(1) A Good Samaritan shall not be liable for any civil or 
criminal action for any injury to or death of the victim of an accident involving a motor vehicle, where 
such injury or death resulted from the Good Samaritan’s negligence in acting or failing to act while 
rendering emergency medical or non-medical care or assistance.  
(2) The Central Government may by rules provide for the procedure for questioning or examination 
of the Good Samaritan, disclosure of personal information of the Good Samaritan and such other related 
matters. 
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “Good Samaritan” means a person, who in good 
faith, voluntarily and without expectation of any reward or compensation renders emergency medical or 
non-medical care or assistance at the scene of an accident to the victim or transports such victim to the 
hospital.] 
135. Schemes to be framed for the investigation of accident cases and wayside amenities, etc.—
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make one or more schemes to 
provide for— 
(a) an in depth study on causes and analysis of motor vehicle accidents; 
(b) wayside amenities on highways; 
(c) traffic aid posts on highways; 4*** 
(d) truck parking complexes along 5[highways; and]. 
6[(e) any other amenities in the interests of the safety and the convenience of the public.] 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 41, for “and if necessary, convey him to the nearest hospital” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 41, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 45 (w.e.f. 1-10-2020). 
4. The word “and” omitted by, s. 46, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for “highways” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Ins. by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

82 
 
(2) Every scheme made under this section by any State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before the State Legislature. 
1[(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make one or more 
schemes to conduct in-depth studies on the causes and analysis of road accidents.] 
136. Inspection of vehicle involved in accident.—When any accident occurs in which a motor 
vehicle is involved, any person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, on production if 
so required of his authority, inspect the vehicle and for that purpose may enter at any reasonable time any 
premises where the vehicle may be, and may remove the vehicle for examination: 
Provided that the place to which the vehicle is so removed shall be intimated to the owner of the 
vehicle and the vehicle shall be returned 2[after completion of the formalities to the owner, driver or the 
person in charge of the vehicle within twenty-four hours]. 
3[136A. Electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety. —(1) The State Government shall 
ensure electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety in the manner provided under sub-section (2) 
on national highways, state highways, roads or in any urban city within a State which has a population up 
to such limits as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall make rules for the electronic monitoring and enforcement of road 
safety including speed cameras, closed-circuit television cameras, speed guns, body wearable cameras 
and such other technology.  
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section the expression “body wearable camera” means a 
mobile audio and video capture device worn on the body or uniform of a person authorised by the State 
Government.] 
137. Power of Central Government to make rules.—The Central Government may make rules to 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the occasions on which signals shall be made by drivers of motor vehicles and such signals 
under section 121; 
4[(aa) providing for the standards of protective headgear and measures for the safety of children 
below the age of four years riding under section 129;] 
(b) the manner in which the licences and certificates may be produced to the police officer under 
section 130. 
4[(c) providing for limits of urban city by the State Governments under sub-section (1) of            
section 136A; and 
(d) providing for electronic monitoring and enforcement under sub-section (2) of section 136A.] 
138. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in 
section 137. 
5[(1A) The State Government may, in the interest of road safety, make rules for the purposes of 
regulating the activities and access of non-mechanically propelled vehicles and pedestrians to public 
places and national highways: 
Provided that in the case of national highways, such rules shall be framed in consultation with the 
National Highways Authority of India.] 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 46 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 42, for “without unnecessary delay” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 47 (w.e.f. 15-7-2021). 
4. Ins. by, s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Ins. by s. 49, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

83 
 
(a) the removal and the safe custody of vehicles including their loads which have broken down or 
which have been left standing or have been abandoned on roads; 
(b) the installation and use of weighing devices; 
(c) the maintenance and management of wayside amenities complexes; 
(d) the exemption from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter of fire brigade vehicles, 
ambulances and other special classes or descriptions of vehicle, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed; 
(e) the maintenance and management of parking places and stands and the fees, if any, which may 
be charged for their use; 
(f) prohibiting the driving downhill of a motor vehicle with the gear disengaged either generally 
or in a specified place; 
(g) prohibiting the taking hold of or mounting of a motor vehicle in motion; 
(h) prohibiting the use of foot-paths or pavements by motor vehicles; 
(i) generally, the prevention of danger, injury or annoyance to the public or any person, or of 
danger or injury to property or of abstruction to traffic; and 
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER IX 
MOTOR VEHICLES TEMPORARILY LEAVING OR VISITING INDIA 
139. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for all or any of the following purposes, namely:— 
(a) the grant and authentication of travelling passes, certificates or authorisations to persons 
temporarily taking motor vehicles out of India to any place outside India or to persons temporarily 
proceeding out of India to any place outside India and desiring to drive a motor vehicle during their 
absence from India; 
(b) prescribing the conditions subject to which motor vehicles brought temporarily into India 
from outside India by persons intending to make a temporary stay in India may be possessed and used 
in India; and 
(c) prescribing the conditions subject to which persons entering India from any place outside 
India for a temporary stay in India may drive motor vehicles in India. 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating and regulating the services of motor vehicles operating between 
India and any other country under any reciprocal arrangement and carrying passengers or goods or both 
by road for hire or reward, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the conditions subject to which motor vehicles carrying on such services may be brought into 
India from outside India and possessed and used in India; 
(b) the conditions subject to which motor vehicles may be taken from any place in India to any 
place outside India; 
(c) the conditions subject to which persons employed as drivers and conductors of such motor 
vehicles may enter or leave India; 
(d) the grant and authentication of travelling passes, certificates or authorisations to persons 
employed as drivers and conductors of such motor vehicles; 
(e) the particulars (other than registration marks) to be exhibited by such motor vehicles and the 
manner in which such particulars are to be exhibited; 
(f) the use of trailers with such motor vehicles; 

84 
 
(g) the exemption of such motor vehicles and their drivers and conductors from all or any of the 
provisions of this Act [other than those referred to in sub-section (4)] or the rules made thereunder; 
(h) the identification of the drivers and conductors of such motor vehicles; 
(i) the replacement of the travelling passes, certificates or authorisations, permits, licences or any 
other prescribed documents lost or defaced, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed; 
(j) the exemption from the provisions of such laws as relate to customs, police or health with a 
view to facilitate such road transport services; 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) No rule made under this section shall operate to confer on any person any immunity in any State 
from the payment of any tax levied in that State on motor vehicles or their users. 
(4) Nothing in this Act or in any rule made thereunder by a State Government relating to:— 
(a) the registration and identification of motor vehicles, or 
(b) the requirements as to construction, maintenance and equipment of motor vehicles, or 
(c) the licensing and the qualifications of drivers and conductors of motor vehicles,  
shall apply—  
(i) to any motor vehicle to which or to any driver of a motor vehicle to whom any rules made 
under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2) apply; or 
(ii) to any conductor of a motor vehicle to whom any rules made under sub-section (2) apply. 
[CHAPTER X—LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT IN CERTAIN CASES] Omitted by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) 
Act, 2019 (32 of 2019) s. 50 (w.e.f. 1-4-2022).  
140. [Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on the principle of no fault.] Omitted by s. 50, 
ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
141. [Provisions as to other right to claim compensation for death or permanent disablement.]  
Omitted by s. 50, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
142. [Permanent disablement.] Omitted by s. 50, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
143. [Applicability of Chapter to certain claims under Act 8 of 1923.] Omitted by s. 50, ibid.                   
(w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
144. [Overriding effect.] Omitted by s. 50, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
1[CHAPTER XI  
INSURANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS 
145. Definitions. — In this Chapter,— 
(a) “authorised insurer” means an insurer for the time being carrying on general insurance 
business in India and granted a certificate of registration by the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India established under section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999) and any Government insurance fund authorised to do 
general insurance business under the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 
1972); 
(b) “certificate of insurance” means a certificate issued by an authorised insurer in pursuance of 
section 147 and includes a cover note complying with such requirements as may be prescribed, and 
where more than one certificate has been issued in connection with a policy, or where a copy of a 
certificate has been issued, all those certificates or that copy, as the case may be; 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 51, for ‘CHAPTER XI’ (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 

85 
 
(c) “grievous hurt” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 320 of                     
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(d) “hit and run motor accident” means an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle or 
motor vehicles the identity whereof cannot be ascertained in spite of reasonable efforts for the 
purpose;  
(e) “Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority” means the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority established under section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999);  
(f) “policy of insurance” includes certificate of insurance; 
(g) “property” includes roads, bridges, culverts, causeways, trees, posts, milestones and baggage 
of passengers and goods carried in any motor vehicle;  
(h) “reciprocating country” means any such country as may on the basis of reciprocity be notified 
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette to be a reciprocating country for the purposes of 
this Act;  
(i) “third party” includes the Government, the driver and any other co-worker on a transport 
vehicle. 
146. Necessity for insurance against third party risks. —(1) No person shall use, except as a 
passenger, or cause or allow any other person to use, a motor vehicle in a public place, unless there is in 
force, in relation to the use of the vehicle by that person or that other person, as the case may be, a policy 
of insurance complying with the requirements of this Chapter: 
Provided that in the case of a vehicle carrying, or meant to carry, dangerous or hazardous goods, there 
shall also be a policy of insurance under the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 (6 of 1991). 
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a person driving a motor vehicle merely as a paid 
employee, while there is in relation to the use of the vehicle no such policy in force as is required by this 
sub-section, shall not be deemed to act in contravention of the sub-section unless he knows or has reason 
to believe that there is no such policy in force.  
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to any vehicle owned by the Central Government 
or a State Government and used for purposes not connected with any commercial enterprise.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by order, exempt from the operation of sub-section (1), any 
vehicle owned by any of the following authorities, namely:— 
(a) the Central Government or a State Government, if the vehicle is used for purposes connected 
with any commercial enterprise; 
(b) any local authority;  
(c) any State Transport Undertaking: 
Provided that no such order shall be made in relation to any such authority unless a fund has been 
established and is maintained by that authority in such manner as may be prescribed by appropriate 
Government. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “appropriate Government” means the Central 
Government or a State Government, as the case may be, and—  
(i) in relation to any corporation or company owned by the Central Government or any State 
Government, means the Central Government or that State Government;  
(ii)  in relation to any corporation or company owned by the Central Government and one or 
more State Governments, means the Central Government;  

86 
 
(iii) in relation to any other State Transport Undertaking or any local authority, means that 
Government which has control over that undertaking or authority. 
 
147. Requirement of policies and limits of liability.—(1) In order to comply with the requirements 
of this Chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy which— 
(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised insurer; and 
(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent specified in               
sub-section (2)— 
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury 
to any person including owner of the goods or his authorised representative carried in the motor 
vehicle or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the motor 
vehicle in a public place; 
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a transport vehicle, except 
gratuitous passengers of a goods vehicle, caused by or arising out of the use of the motor vehicle in 
a public place. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the death of or bodily injury 
to any person or damage to any property of a third party shall be deemed to have been caused by or to 
have arisen out of, the use of a vehicle in a public place, notwithstanding that the person who is dead 
or injured or the property which is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the accident, if 
the act or omission which led to the accident occurred in a public place. 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained under any other law for the time being in force, for the 
purposes of third party insurance related to either death of a person or grievous hurt to a person, the 
Central Government shall prescribe a base premium and the liability of an insurer in relation to such 
premium for an insurance policy under sub-section (1) in consultation with the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority. 
(3) A policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this Chapter unless and until there is issued 
by the insurer in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected, a certificate of insurance in the 
prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars of any condition subject to which the policy 
is issued and of any other prescribed matters; and different forms, particulars and matters may be 
prescribed in different cases. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a policy of Insurance issued before the 
commencement of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall be continued on the existing 
terms under the contract and the provisions of this Act shall apply as if this Act had not been 
amended by the said Act. 
(5) Where a cover note issued by the insurer under the provisions of this Chapter or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder is not followed by a policy of insurance within the specified time, the 
insurer shall, within seven days of the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, notify the 
fact to the registering authority or to such other authority as the State Government may prescribe. 
 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an insurer 
issuing a policy of insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify the person or classes of 
persons specified in the policy in respect of any liability which the policy purports to cover in the case 
of that person or those classes of persons. 
 
148. Validity of policies of insurance issued in reciprocating countries.—Where, in pursuance of 
an arrangement between India and any reciprocating country, the motor vehicle registered in the 
reciprocating country operates on any route or within any area common to the two countries and there is 
in force in relation to the use of the vehicle in the reciprocating country, a policy of insurance complying 
with the requirements of the law of insurance for the time being in force in that country, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 147 but subject to any rules which may be made under 
section 164B such policy of insurance shall be effective throughout the route or area in respect of which 
the arrangement has been made, as if the policy of insurance had complied with the requirements of this 
Chapter. 
 

87 
 
149. Settlement by insurance company and procedure therefor.—(1) The insurance company 
shall, upon receiving information of the accident, either from claimant or through accident information 
report or otherwise, designate an officer to settle the claims relating to such accident. 
(2) An officer designated by the insurance company for processing the settlement of claim of 
compensation may make an offer to the claimant for settlement before the Claims Tribunal giving such 
details, within thirty days and after following such procedure as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(3) If, the claimant to whom the offer is made under sub-section (2),— 
(a) accepts such offer,— 
(i) the Claims Tribunal shall make a record of such settlement, and such claim shall be 
deemed to be settled by consent; and 
(ii) the payment shall be made by the insurance company within a maximum period of thirty 
days from the date of receipt of such record of settlement; 
(b) rejects such offer, a date of hearing shall be fixed by the Claims Tribunal to adjudicate such 
claim on merits. 
 
150. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments and awards against persons insured in respect of 
third party risks.—(1) If, after a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of             
section 147 in favour of the person by whom a policy has been effected, judgment or award in respect of 
any such liability as is required to be covered by a policy under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of                 
section 147 (being a liability covered by the terms of the policy) or under the provisions of section 164 is 
obtained against any person insured by the policy, then, notwithstanding that the insurer may be entitled 
to avoid or cancel or may have avoided or cancelled the policy, the insurer shall, subject to the provisions 
of this section, pay to the person entitled to the benefit of the award any sum not exceeding the sum 
assured payable thereunder, as if that person were the decree holder, in respect of the liability, together 
with any amount payable in respect of costs and any sum payable in respect of interest on that sum by 
virtue of any enactment relating to interest on judgments. 
(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer under sub-section (1) in respect of any judgment or award 
unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment or award is given the insurer 
had notice through the court or, as the case may be, the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of the 
proceedings, or in respect of such judgment or award so long as its execution is stayed pending an appeal; 
and an insurer to whom notice of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given shall be entitled to be 
made a party thereto, and to defend the action on any of the following grounds, namely:— 
(a) that there has been a breach of a specified condition of the policy, being one of the following 
conditions, namely:–– 
(i) a condition excluding the use of the vehicle— 
(A) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on the date of the contract of insurance a vehicle 
not covered by a permit to ply for hire or reward; or 
(B) for organised racing and speed testing; or 
(C) for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the vehicle is used, where the 
vehicle is a transport vehicle; or 
(D) without side-car being attached where the vehicle is a two-wheeled vehicle; or 
(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or by any person who is not duly licenced or 
by any person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence during the period 
of disqualification or driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs as laid down in section 185; or 
(iii) a condition excluding liability for injury caused or contributed to by conditions of war, civil 
war, riot or civil commotion; or 
(b) that the policy is void on the ground that it was obtained by nondisclosure of any material fact or 
by representation of any fact which was false in some material particular; or 
(c) that there is non-receipt of premium as required under section 64VB of the Insurance                     
Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).  
(3) Where any such judgment or award as is referred to in sub-section (1) is obtained from a court in a 
reciprocating country and in the case of a foreign judgment is, by virtue of the provisions of section 13 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) conclusive as to any matter adjudicated upon by it, the 
insurer (being an insurer registered under the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) and whether or not that 

88 
 
person is registered under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country) shall be liable to the person 
entitled to the benefit of the decree in the manner and to the extent specified in sub-section (1), as if the 
judgment or award were given by a court in India: 
Provided that no sum shall be payable by the insurer in respect of any such judgment or award unless, 
before the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment or award is given, the insurer had 
notice through the court concerned of the bringing of the proceedings and the insurer to whom notice is so 
given is entitled under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, to be made a party to the 
proceedings and to defend the action on grounds similar to those specified in sub-section (2). 
(4) Where a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of section 147 to the person 
by whom a policy has been effected, so much of the policy as purports to restrict the insurance of the 
persons insured thereby, by reference to any condition other than those in sub-section (2) shall, as 
respects such liabilities as are required to be covered by a policy under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 147, be of no effect. 
(5) No insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) has been given 
shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person entitled to the benefit of any such judgment or award 
as is referred to in sub-section (1) or in such judgment as is referred to in sub-section (3) otherwise than in 
the manner provided for in sub-section (2) or in the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, as the 
case may be. 
(6) If on the date of filing of any claim, the claimant is not aware of the insurance company with 
which the vehicle had been insured, it shall be the duty of the owner of the vehicle to furnish to the 
tribunal or court the information as to whether the vehicle had been insured on the date of the accident, 
and if so, the name of the insurance company with which it is insured. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “award” means an award made by the Claims Tribunal under section 168; 
(b) “Claims Tribunal” means a Claims Tribunal constituted under section 165; 
(c) “liability covered by the terms of the policy” means the liability which is covered by the 
policy or which would be so covered but for the fact that the insurer is entitled to avoid or cancel or 
has avoided or cancelled the policy; and 
(d) “material fact” and “material particular” mean, respectively, a fact or particular of such a 
nature as to influence the judgment of a prudent insurer in determining whether he shall take the risk 
and, if so, at what premium and on what conditions. 
151. Rights of third party against insurers on insolvency of insured.—(1) Where under any 
contract of insurance affected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a person is insured 
against liabilities which he may incur to third party, then—  
(a) in the event of the person becoming insolvent or making a composition or arrangement with 
his creditors; or 
 (b) where the insured person is a company, in the event of a winding-up order being made or a 
resolution for a voluntary winding-up being passed with respect to the company or of a receiver or 
manager of the company’s business or undertaking being duly appointed, or of possession being taken 
by or on behalf of the holders of any debentures secured by a floating charge of any property 
comprised in or subject to the charge,  
if, either before or after that event, any such liability is incurred by the insured person his rights against 
the insurer under the contract in respect of the liability shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 
any provision of law, be transferred to and vest in the third party to whom the liability was so incurred.  
(2) Where an order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor is made according to the 
law of insolvency, then, if any debt provable in insolvency is owing by the deceased in respect of a 
liability to a third party against which he was insured under a contract of insurance in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter, the deceased debtor’s rights against the insurer in respect of that liability shall, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any provision of law, be transferred to and vest in the person 
to whom the debt is owing. 
(3) Any condition in a policy issued for the purposes of this Chapter purporting, either directly or 
indirectly, to avoid the policy or to alter the rights of the parties thereunder upon the happening to the 
insured person of any of the events specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) or upon the                     
making of an order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor according to the law of 
insolvency, shall be of no effect.  

89 
 
(4) Upon a transfer under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the insurer shall be under the same 
liability to the third party as he would have been to the insured person, but— 
 (a) if the liability of the insurer to the insured person exceeds the liability of the insured person to 
the third party, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of the insured person against the insurer 
in respect of the excess amount; and  
(b) if the liability of the insurer to the insured person is less than the liability of the insured person 
to the third party, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of the third party against the insured 
person in respect of the balance amount. 
152. Duty to give information as to insurance. —(1) No person against whom a claim is made in 
respect of any liability referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147 shall, on demand by or on 
behalf of the person making the claim, refuse to state whether or not he was insured in respect of that 
liability by any policy issued under the provisions of this Chapter, or would have been so insured if the 
insurer had not avoided or cancelled the policy, nor shall he refuse, if he was or would have been so 
insured, to give such particulars with respect to that policy as were specified in the certificate of insurance 
issued in respect thereof.  
(2) In the event of any person becoming insolvent or making an arrangement with his creditors or in 
the event of an order being made for the administration of the estate of a deceased person according to the 
law of insolvency, or in the event of a winding-up order being made or a resolution for a voluntary 
winding-up being passed with respect to any company or of a receiver or manager of the company’s 
business or undertaking being duly appointed or of possession being taken by or on behalf of the holders 
of any debentures secured by a floating charge on any property comprised in or subject to the charge, it 
shall be the duty of the insolvent debtor, personal representative of the deceased debtor or company, as 
the case may be, or the official assignee or receiver in insolvency, trustee, liquidator, receiver or manager, 
or person in possession of the property to give, on the request of any person claiming that the insolvent 
debtor, deceased debtor or company is under such liability to him as is covered by the provision of this 
Chapter, such information as may reasonably be required by him for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
any rights have been transferred to and vested in him by section 151 and for the purpose of enforcing such 
rights, if any and any such contract of insurance as purports whether directly or indirectly to avoid the 
contract or to alter the rights of the parties thereunder upon the giving of such information in the events 
aforesaid, or otherwise to prohibit or prevent the giving thereof in the said events, shall be of no effect.  
(3) If, from the information given to any person in pursuance of sub-section (2) or otherwise, he has 
reasonable ground for supporting that there have or may have been transferred to him under this Chapter 
rights against any particular insurer, that insurer shall be subject to the same duty as is imposed by the 
said sub-section on the persons therein mentioned. 
(4) The duty to give the information imposed by this section shall include a duty to allow all contracts 
of insurance, receipts for premiums, and other relevant documents in the possession or power of the 
person on whom the duty is so imposed to be inspected and copies thereof to be taken. 
153. Settlement between insurers and insured persons. — (1) No settlement made by an insurer in 
respect of any claim which might be made by a third party in respect of any liability of the nature referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147 shall be valid unless such third party is a party to the 
settlement. 
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall ensure that the settlement is bona fide and was not made under undue 
influence and the compensation is made in accordance with the payment schedule referred to in                     
sub-section (1) of section 164. 
 (3) Where a person who is insured under a policy issued for the purpose of this Chapter has become 
insolvent, or where, if such insured person is a company, a winding-up order has been made or a 
resolution for a voluntary winding-up has been passed with respect to the company, no agreement made 
between the insurer and the insured person after the liability has been incurred to a third party and after 
the commencement of the insolvency or winding-up, as the case may be, nor any waiver, assignment or 
other disposition made by or payment made to the insured person after the commencement aforesaid, 

90 
 
shall be effective to defeat the rights transferred to the third party under this Chapter but those rights shall 
be the same as if no such agreement, waiver, assignment or disposition or payment has been made. 
154. Saving in respect of sections 151, 152 and 153.— (1) For the purposes of sections 151, 152 and 
153, a reference to “liabilities to third parties” in relation to a person insured under any policy of 
insurance shall not include a reference to any liability of that person in the capacity of insurer under some 
other policy of insurance. 
(2) The provisions of sections 151, 152 and 153 shall not apply where a company is wound-up 
voluntarily merely for the purposes of reconstruction or of an amalgamation with another company. 
155. Effect of death on certain causes of action.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
306 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, (39 of 1925) the death of a person in whose favour a certificate 
of insurance had been issued, if it occurs after the happening of an event which has given rise to a claim 
under the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be a bar to the survival of any cause of action arising out of 
such event against his estate or against the insurer. 
156. Effect of certificate of insurance.—When an insurer has issued a certificate of insurance in 
respect of a contract of insurance between the insurer and the insured person, then—  
(a) if and so long as the policy described in the certificate has not been issued by the insurer to 
the insured, the insurer shall, as between himself and any other person except the insured, be deemed 
to have issued to the insured person a policy of insurance conforming in all respects with the 
description and particulars stated in such certificate; and  
(b) if the insurer has issued to the insured the policy described in the certificate, but the actual 
terms of the policy are less favourable to persons claiming under or by virtue of the policy against the 
insurer either directly or through the insured than the particulars of the policy as stated in the 
certificate, the policy shall, as between the insurer and any other person except the insured, be 
deemed to be in terms conforming in all respects with the particulars stated in the said certificate. 
157. Transfer of certificate of insurance.—(1) Where a person, in whose favour the certificate of 
insurance has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, transfers to another person 
the ownership of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken together with the policy 
of insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and the policy described in the certificate shall be 
deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to whom the motor vehicle is transferred with 
effect from the date of its transfer. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that such deemed transfer shall include 
transfer of rights and liabilities of the said certificate of insurance and policy of insurance. 
(2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of transfer in the prescribed form to 
the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to the fact of transfer in the certificate of insurance 
and the policy described in the certificate in his favour and the insurer shall make the necessary changes 
in the certificate and the policy of insurance in regard to the transfer of insurance. 
158. Production of certain certificates, licence and permit in certain cases.—(1) Any person 
driving a motor vehicle in any public place shall, on being so required by a police officer in uniform 
authorised in this behalf by the State Government, produce—  
(a) the certificate of insurance;  
(b) the certificate of registration; 
(c) the pollution under control certificate;  
(d) the driving licence;  
(e) in the case of a transport vehicle, also the certificate of fitness referred to in section 56, and 
the permit; and 
(f) any certificate or authorisation of exemption that has been granted under this Act,  
relating to the use of the vehicle. 

91 
 
(2) Where, owing to the presence of a motor vehicle in a public place, an accident occurs involving 
death or bodily injury to another person, if the driver of the vehicle does not at that time produce the 
required certificate, driving licence and permit referred to in sub-section (1) to a police officer, he or the 
owner shall produce the said certificates, licence and permit at the police station at which the driver 
makes the report required by section 134.  
(3) No person shall be liable to conviction for offences under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by 
reason of the failure to produce the required certificate if, within seven days from the date on which its 
production was required under sub-section (1), or as the case may be, from the date of occurrence of the 
accident, he produces the certificate at such police station as may have been specified by him to the police 
officer who required its production or, as the case may be, to the police officer at the site of the accident 
or to the officer-in-charge of the police station at which he reported the accident:  
Provided that except to such extent and with such modifications as may be prescribed, the provisions 
of this sub-section shall not apply to the driver of a transport vehicle. 
(4) The owner of a motor vehicle shall give such information as he may be required by or on behalf of 
a police officer empowered in this behalf by the State Government for the purpose of determining 
whether the vehicle was or was not being driven in contravention of section 146 and on any occasion 
when the driver was required under this section to produce the certificate of insurance.  
(5) In this section, the expression “produce the certificate of insurance” means production for 
examination the relevant certificate of insurance or such other evidence as may be prescribed to prove 
that the vehicle was not being driven in contravention of section 146. 
159. Information to be given regarding accident.—The police officer shall, during the 
investigation, prepare an accident information report to facilitate the settlement of claim in such form and 
manner, within three months and containing such particulars and submit the same to the Claims Tribunal 
and such other agency as may be prescribed. 
160. Duty to furnish particulars of vehicle involved in accident.—A registering authority or the 
officer-in-charge of a police station shall, if so required by a person who alleges that he is entitled to 
claim compensation in respect of an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle, or if so required by 
an insurer against whom a claim has been made in respect of any motor vehicle, furnish to that person or 
to that insurer, as the case may be, on payment of the prescribed fee, any information at the disposal of 
the said authority or the said police officer relating to the identification marks and other particulars of the 
vehicle and the name and address of the person who was using the vehicle at the time of the accident or 
was injured by it and the property, if any, damaged in such form and within such time as the Central 
Government may prescribe. 
161. Special provisions as to compensation in case of hit and run motor accident.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having 
the force of law, the Central Government shall provide for paying in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the scheme made under sub-section (3), compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous 
hurt to, persons resulting from hit and run motor accidents. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the scheme made under sub-section (3), there shall be 
paid as compensation,—  
(a) in respect of the death of any person resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a fixed sum 
of two lakh rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed by the Central Government; 
 (b) in respect of grievous hurt to any person resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a fixed 
sum of fifty thousand rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make a scheme specifying 
the manner in which the scheme shall be administered by the Central Government or General Insurance 
Council, the form, manner and the time within which applications for compensation may be made, the 
officers or authorities to whom such applications may be made, the procedure to be followed by such 
officers or authorities for considering and passing orders on such applications, and all other matters 

92 
 
connected with, or incidental to, the administration of the scheme and the payment of compensation under 
this section. 
(4) A scheme made under sub-section (3) may provide that,—  
(a) a payment of such sum as may be prescribed by the Central Government as interim relief to 
any claimant under such scheme;  
(b) a contravention of any provision thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but may 
extend to five lakh rupees or with both;  
(c) the powers, functions or duties conferred or imposed on any officer or authority by such 
scheme may be delegated with the prior approval in writing of Central Government, by such officer 
or authority to any other officer or authority. 
162. Scheme for golden hour.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the General Insurance 
Companies (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972) or any other law for the time being in force or any 
instrument having the force of law, the insurance companies for the time being carrying on general 
insurance business in India shall provide in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the schemes 
made under this Act for treatment of road accident victims, including during the golden hour.  
(2) The Central Government shall make a scheme for the cashless treatment of victims of the accident 
during the golden hour and such scheme may contain provisions for creation of a fund for such treatment. 
163. Refund in certain cases of compensation paid under section 161.—(1) The payment of 
compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt to, any person under section 161 shall be subject 
to the condition that if any compensation (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the other 
compensation) or other amount in lieu of or by way of satisfaction of a claim for compensation is 
awarded or paid in respect of such death or grievous hurt under any other provision of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force or otherwise, so much of the other compensation or other amount 
aforesaid as is equal to the compensation paid under section 161, shall be refunded to the insurer. 
 (2) Before awarding compensation in respect of an accident involving the death of, or bodily injury 
to, any person arising out of the use of a motor vehicle under any provision of this Act other than                
section 161 or any other law for the time being in force, the Claims Tribunal, court or other authority 
awarding such compensation shall verify as to whether in respect of such death or bodily injury 
compensation has already been paid under section 161 or an application for payment of compensation is 
pending under that section, and such Tribunal, court or other authority shall— 
(a) if compensation has already been paid under section 161, direct the person liable to pay the 
compensation awarded by it to refund to the insurer, so much thereof as is required to be refunded in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1);  
(b) if an application for payment of compensation is pending under section 161 forward the 
particulars as to the compensation awarded by it to the insurer.  
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, an application for compensation under section 161 
shall be deemed to be pending— 
(i) if such application has been rejected, till the date of the rejection of the application; and  
(ii) in any other case, till the date of payment of compensation in pursuance of the 
application. 
 
164. Payment of compensation in case of death or grevious hurt, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force or instrument having the 
force of law, the owner of the motor vehicle or the authorised insurer shall be liable to pay in the case of 
death or grievous hurt due to any accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle, a compensation, of a 
sum of five lakh rupees in case of death or of two and a half lakh rupees in case of grievous hurt to the 
legal heirs or the victim, as the case may be. 

93 
 
(2) In any claim for compensation under sub-section (1), the claimant shall not be required to plead or 
establish that the death or grievous hurt in respect of which the claim has been made was due to any 
wrongful act or neglect or default of the owner of the vehicle or of the vehicle concerned or of any other 
person. 
(3) Where, in respect of death or grievous hurt due to an accident arising out of the use of motor 
vehicle, compensation has been paid under any other law for the time being in force, such amount of 
compensation shall be reduced from the amount of compensation payable under this section. 
 
164A. Scheme for interim relief for claimants.—(1) The Central Government, may make schemes 
for the provision of interim relief to claimants praying for compensation under this Chapter. 
 
(2) A scheme made under sub-section (1) shall also provide for procedure to recover funds disbursed 
under such scheme from the owner of the motor vehicle, where the claim arises out of the use of such 
motor vehicle or other sources as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
 
164B. Motor Vehicle Accident Fund.—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be 
called the Motor Vehicle Accident Fund and thereto shall be credited— 
(a) payment of a nature notified and approved by the Central Government; 
(b) any grant or loan made to the Fund by the Central Government; 
(c) the balance of the Fund created under scheme framed under section 163, as it stood immediately 
before the commencement of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019; and 
 
(d) any other source of income as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be constituted for the purpose of providing compulsory insurance cover to all road 
users in the territory of India.  
 
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for the following, namely:— 
(a) treatment of the persons injured in road accidents in accordance with the scheme framed by the 
Central Government under section 162;  
 
(b) compensation to representatives of a person who died in hit and run motor accident in 
accordance with schemes framed under section 161; 
 
(c) compensation to a person grievously hurt in a hit and run motor accident in accordance with 
schemes framed under section 161; and 
 
(d) compensation to such persons as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(4) The maximum liability amount that shall be paid in each case shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.  
 
(5) In all cases specified in clause (a) of sub-section (3), when the claim of such person becomes 
payable, where amount has been paid out of this Fund to any person, the same amount shall be deductible 
from the claim received by such person from the insurance company. 
 
(6) The Fund shall be managed by such authority or agency as the Central Government may specify 
having regard to the following:—  
 
(a) knowledge of insurance business of the agency; 
(b) capability of the agency to manage funds; and  
(c) any other criteria as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 

94 
 
(7) The Central Government shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an 
annual statement of accounts of the Fund in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government 
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
  
(8) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such 
intervals as may be specified by him.  
 
(9) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the Fund under this Act shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority. 
 
(10) The accounts of the Fund, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of the Parliament. 
 
(11) Any scheme framed under sub-section (3) of section 161, as it stood immediately before the 
commencement of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019, shall be discontinued and all rights and 
liabilities accruing thereunder shall be met out of the Fund with effect from the date of commencement of 
this Act. 
164C. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may make 
rules for the purposes of carrying into effect, the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the forms to be used for the purposes of this Chapter including,—  
(i) the form of the insurance policy and the particulars it shall contain as referred to in                     
sub-section (3) of section 147;  
(ii) the form for making changes in regard to the fact of transfer in the certificate of insurance 
under sub-section (2) of section 157; 
(iii) the form in which the accident information report may be prepared, the particulars it shall 
contain, the manner and the time for submitting the report to the Claims Tribunal and the other 
agency under section 159;  
(iv) the form for furnishing information under section 160; and  
(v) the form of the annual statement of accounts for the Motor Vehicle Accident Fund under 
sub-section (7) of section 164B;  
(b) the making of applications for and the issue of certificates of insurance; 
(c) the issue of duplicates to replace certificates of insurance lost, destroyed or mutilated; 
(d) the custody, production, cancellation and surrender of certificates of insurance; 

95 
 
 (e) the records to be maintained by insurers of policies of insurance issued under this 
Chapter; 
 (f) the identification by certificates or otherwise of persons or vehicles exempted from the 
provisions of this Chapter; 
 (g) the furnishing of information respecting policies of insurance by insurers; 
 (h) adopting the provisions of this Chapter to vehicles brought into India by persons making 
only a temporary stay therein or to vehicles registered in a reciprocating country and operating 
on any route or within any area in India by applying those provisions with prescribed 
modifications;  
(i) the requirements which a certificate of insurance is required to comply with as referred to 
in clause (b) of section 145; 
 (j) administration of the Fund established under sub-section (3) of section 146; 
(k) the minimum premium and the maximum liability of an insurer under sub-section (2) of 
section 147;  
(l) the conditions subject to which an insurance policy shall be issued and other matters 
related thereto as referred to in sub-section (3) of section 147; 
 (m) the details of settlement, the time limit for such settlement and the procedure thereof 
under sub-section (2) of section 149;  
(n) the extent of exemptions and the modifications under the proviso to sub-section (3) of 
section 158;  
(o) the other evidence under sub-section (5) of section 158;  
(p) such other agency to which the accident information report as referred to in section 159 
may be submitted; 
(q) the time limit and fee for furnishing information under section 160;  
(r) the higher amount of compensation in respect of death under clause (a) of sub-section (2) 
of section 161;  
(s) a sum to be paid as interim relief as referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of              
section 161;  
(t) the procedure for payment of compensation under sub-section (1) of section 164;  
(u) such other sources from which funds may be recovered for the scheme as referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 164A;  
(v) any other source of income that may be credited into the Motor Vehicle Accident Fund 
under sub-section (1) of section 164B; 
(w) the persons to whom compensation may be paid under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of 
section 164B; 
(x) the maximum liability amount under sub-section (4) of section 164B;  
(y) the other criteria under clause (c) of sub-section (6) of section 164B;  

96 
 
 (z) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is 
to be made by rules. 
164D. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purposes of carrying into effect, the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in 
section 164C. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the other authority under sub-section (5) of section 147; and 
(b) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by rules.] 
CHAPTER XII 
CLAIMS TRIBUNALS 
165. Claims Tribunals.—(1) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as Claims 
Tribunal) for such area as may be specified in the notification for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims 
for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of, or bodily injury to, persons arising out of 
the use of motor vehicles, or damages to any property of a third party so arising, or both. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “claims for 
compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of or bodily injury to persons arising out of the 
use of motor vehicles” includes claims for compensation under 1[section 164]. 
(2) A Claims Tribunal shall consist of such number of members as the State Government may think 
fit to appoint and where it consists of two or more members, one of them shall be appointed as the 
Chairman thereof. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of a Claims Tribunal unless he— 
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or 
(b) is, or has been, a District Judge; or 
(c) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court 2[or as a District Judge]. 
(4) Where two or more Claims Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government, may by 
general or special order, regulate the distribution of business among them. 
166. Application for compensation.—(1) An application for compensation arising out of an accident 
of the nature specified in sub-section (1) of section 165 may be made— 
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or 
(b) by the owner of the property; or 
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the legal representatives of the 
deceased; or 
(d) by any agent duly authorised by the person injured or all or any of the legal representatives of 
the deceased, as the case may be: 
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined in any such 
application for compensation, the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal 
representatives of the deceased and the legal representatives who have not so joined, shall be impleaded 
as respondents to the application. 
 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 52, for “section 140 and section 163A” (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
2. Added by Act 54 of 1994, s. 52 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

97 
 
1[Provided further that where a person accepts compensation under section 164 in accordance with 
the procedure provided under section 149, his claims petition before the Claims Tribunal shall lapse.] 
2[(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made, at the option of the claimant, either to the 
Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred or to the Claims 
Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the claimant resides or carries on business or within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant resides, and shall be in such form and contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed: 
3*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
*.] 
4[(3) No application for compensation shall be entertained unless it is made within six months of the 
occurrence of the accident.] 
5[(4) The Claims Tribunal shall treat any report of accidents forwarded to it under 6[section 159] as an 
application for compensation under this Act.] 
7[(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the right of a 
person to claim compensation for injury in an accident shall, upon the death of the person injured, survive 
to his legal representatives, irrespective of whether the cause of death is relatable to or had any nexus with 
the injury or not.] 
167. Option regarding claims for compensation in certain cases.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), where the death of, or bodily injury to, 
any person gives rise to a claim for compensation under this Act and also under the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act, 1923, the person entitled to compensation may without prejudice to the provisions of 
Chapter X claim such compensation under either of those Acts but not under both. 
168. Award of the Claims Tribunal.—(1) On receipt of an application for compensation made 
under section 166, the Claims Tribunal shall, after giving notice of the application to the insurer and after 
giving the parties (including the insurer) an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry into the claim or, 
as the case may be, each of the claims and, subject to the provisions of 8[section 163] may make an award 
determining the amount of compensation which appears to it to be just and specifying the person or 
persons to whom compensation shall be paid and in making the award the Claims Tribunal shall specify 
the amount which shall be paid by the insurer or owner or driver of the vehicle involved in the accident or 
by all or any of them, as the case may be: 
9*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 (2) The Claims Tribunal shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned 
expeditiously and in any case within a period of fifteen days from the date of the award. 
(3) When an award is made under this section, the person who is required to pay any amount in terms 
of such award shall, within thirty days of the date of announcing the award by the Claims Tribunal, 
deposit the entire amount awarded in such manner as the Claims Tribunal may direct. 
169. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunals.—(1) In holding any inquiry under section 168, 
the Claims Tribunal may, subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, follow such summary 
procedure as it thinks fit. 
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of taking evidence 
on oath and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production of 
documents and material objects and for such other purposes as may be prescribed; and the Claims 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 53 (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 53, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Proviso omitted by Act 32 of 2019, s. 53, (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
4. Ins. by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2022), Earlier sub-section (3) omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 53, (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
5. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 53, for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 53, for “sub-section (6) of section 158” (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
7. Ins. by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
8. Subs. by s. 54, ibid, for s. 162 (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
9. Proviso omitted by s. 54, ibid, (w.e.f. 1-4-2022).  

98 
 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Claims Tribunal may, for the purpose of 
adjudicating upon any claim for compensation, choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge 
of any matter relevant to the inquiry to assist it in holding the inquiry. 
1[(4) For the purpose of enforcement of its award, the Claims Tribunal shall also have all the powers 
of a Civil Court in the execution of a decree under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as if the 
award were a decree for the payment of money passed by such court in a civil suit.] 
170. Impleading insurer in certain cases.—Where in the course of any inquiry, the Claims Tribunal 
is satisfied that— 
(a) there is collusion between the person making the claim and the person against whom the 
claim is made; or 
(b) the person against whom the claim is made has failed to contest the claim,  
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such 
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have, 
without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) of 2[section 150], the right to contest the 
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to the person against whom the claim has been made. 
171. Award of interest where any claim is allowed.—Where any Claims Tribunal allows a claim 
for compensation made under this Act, such Tribunal may direct that in addition to the amount of 
compensation simple interest shall also be paid at such rate and from such date not earlier than the date of 
making the claim as it may specify in this behalf. 
172. Award of compensatory costs in certain cases.—(1) Any Claims Tribunal adjudicating upon 
any claim for compensation under this Act, may in any case where it is satisfied for reasons to be 
recorded by it in writing that— 
(a) the policy of insurance is void on the ground that it was obtained by representation of fact 
which was false in any material particular; or 
(b) any party or insurer has put forward a false or vexatious claim or defence, 
such Tribunal may make an order for the payment, by the party who is guilty of mis-representation or by 
whom such claim or defence has been put forward of special costs by way of compensation to the insurer 
or, as the case may be, to the party against whom such claim or defence has been put forward. 
(2) No Claims Tribunal shall pass an order for special costs under sub-section (1) for any amount 
exceeding one thousand rupees. 
(3) No person or insurer against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason 
thereof be exempted from any criminal liability in respect of such mis-representation, claim or defence as 
is referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) Any amount awarded by way of compensation under this section in respect of any                     
mis-representation, claim or defence, shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages for 
compensation in respect of such mis-representation, claim or defence. 
173. Appeals.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), any person aggrieved by an award of 
a Claims Tribunal may, within ninety days from the date of the award, prefer an appeal to the High Court: 
Provided that no appeal by the person who is required to pay any amount in terms of such award shall 
be entertained by the High Court unless he has deposited with it twenty-five thousand rupees or fifty per 
cent. of the amount so awarded, whichever is less, in the manner directed by the High Court: 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 55, (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
2. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for S. 149 (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 

99 
 
Provided further that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the 
appeal in time. 
(2) No appeal shall lie against any award of a Claims Tribunal if the amount in dispute in the appeal 
is less than 1[one lakh] rupees. 
174. Recovery of money from insurer as arrear of land revenue.—Where any amount is due from 
any person under an award, the Claims Tribunal may, on an application made to it by the person entitled 
to the amount, issue a certificate for the amount to the Collector and the Collector shall proceed to recover 
the same in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
175. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts.—Where any Claims Tribunal has been constituted for any 
area, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any question relating to any claim for 
compensation which may be adjudicated upon by the Claims Tribunal for that area, and no injunction in 
respect of any action taken or to be taken by or before the Claims Tribunal in respect of the claim for 
compensation shall be granted by the Civil Court. 
176. Power of State Government to make rules.—A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of sections 165 to 174, and in particular, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the form of application for claims for compensation and the particulars it may contain, and the 
fees, if any, to be paid in respect of such applications; 
(b) the procedure to be followed by a Claims Tribunal in holding an inquiry under this Chapter; 
(c) the powers vested in a Civil Court which may be exercised by a Claims Tribunal; 
(d) the form and the manner in which and the fees (if any) on payment of which an appeal may be 
preferred against an award of a Claims Tribunal; and 
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
177. General provision for punishment of offences.—Whoever contravenes any provision of this 
Act or of any rule, regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the 
offence be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to 2[five hundred rupees], and for 
any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to 3[one thousand and five hundred 
rupees]. 
4[177A. Penalty for contravention of regulations under section 118.—Whoever contravenes the 
regulations made under section 118, shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five 
hundred rupees, but may extend to one thousand rupees.] 
178. Penalty for travelling without pass or ticket and for dereliction of duty on the part of 
conductor and refusal to ply contract carriage, etc.—(1) Whoever travels in a stage carriage without 
having a proper pass or ticket with him or being in or having alighted from a stage carriage fails or 
refuses to present for examination or to deliver up his pass or ticket immediately on a requisition being 
made therefor, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
Explanation.—In this section, “pass” and “ticket” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
section 124. 
(2) If the conductor of a stage carriage, or the driver of a stage carriage performing the functions of a 
conductor in such stage carriage, whose duty is— 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 57, for “ten thousand” (w.e.f. 1-4-2022). 
2. Subs. by, s. 58, ibid., for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for “three hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Ins. by s. 59, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

100 
 
(a) to supply a ticket to a person travelling in a stage carriage on payment of fare by such person, 
either wilfully or negligently,— 
(i) fails or refuses to accept the fare when tendered; or 
(ii) fails or refuses to supply a ticket; or 
(iii) supplies an invalid ticket; or 
(iv) supplies a ticket of a lesser value; or 
(b) to check any pass or ticket, either wilfully or negligently fails or refuses to do so, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(3) If the holder of a permit or the driver of a contract carriage refuses, in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, to ply the contract carriage or to carry the passengers, he 
shall,— 
(a) in the case of two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, be punishable with fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees; and 
(b) in any other case, be punishable with fine which may extend to 1[five hundred rupees]. 
179. Disobedience of orders, obstruction and refusal of information.—(1) Whoever wilfully 
disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or authority empowered under this Act to give such 
direction, or obstructs any person or authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or 
authority is required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for 
the offence be punishable with fine which may extend to 2[two thousand rupees]. 
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act to supply any information, wilfully withholds such 
information or gives information which he known to be false or which he does not believe to be true, 
shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 2[two thousand rupees], or with both. 
180. Allowing unauthorised persons to drive vehicles.—Whenever, being the owner or person in 
charge of a motor vehicle, causes, or permits, any other person who does not satisfy the provisions of 
section 3 or section 4 to drive the vehicle shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine 3[of five thousand rupees], or with both. 
181. Driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 or section 4.—Whoever, drives a motor vehicle 
in contravention of section 3 or section 4 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine 4[of five thousand rupees], or with both. 
182. Offences relating to licences.—(1) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or 
obtaining a driving licence drives a motor vehicle in a public place or in any other place, or applies for or 
obtains a driving licence or, not being entitled to have a driving licence issued to him free of 
endorsement, applies for or obtains a driving licence without disclosing the endorsement made on a 
driving licence previously held by him shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine 5[of ten thousand rupees] or with both, and any driving licence so 
obtained by him shall be of no effect. 
(2) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or obtaining a conductor’s licence, acts as 
a conductor of a stage carriage in a public place or applies for or obtains a conductor’s licence or, not 
being entitled to have a conductor’s licence issued to him free of endorsement, applies for or obtains a 
conductor’s licence without disclosing the endorsements made on a conductor’s licence previously held 
by him, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 60, for “two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Subs. by s. 62, ibid., for “which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 63, ibid., for “which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Subs. by s. 64, ibid., for “which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

101 
 
which may extend to 1[ten thousand rupees], or with both, and any conductor’s licence so obtained by him 
shall be of no effect. 
2[182A. Punishment for offences relating to construction, maintenance, sale and alteration of 
motor vehicles and components.—(1) Whoever, being a manufacturer, importer or dealer of motor 
vehicles, sells or delivers or alters or offers to sell or deliver or alter, a motor vehicle that is in 
contravention of the provisions of Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine of one lakh rupees 
per such motor vehicle or with both: 
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if he proves that, at the time of sale or 
delivery or alteration or offer of sale or delivery or alteration of such motor vehicle, he had disclosed to 
the other party the manner in which such motor vehicle was in contravention of the provisions of Chapter 
VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(2) Whoever, being a manufacturer of motor vehicles, fails to comply with the provisions of Chapter 
VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one hundred crore rupees or with both. 
(3) Whoever, sells or offers to sell, or permits the sale of any component of a motor vehicle which has 
been notified as a critical safety component by the Central Government and which does not comply with 
Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year or with fine of one lakh rupees per such component or with both. 
(4) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, alters a motor vehicle, including by way of 
retrofitting of motor vehicle parts, in a manner not permitted under the Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine of five thousand rupees per such alteration or with both. 
182B. Punishment for contravention of section 62A.—Whoever contravenes the provisions of 
section 62A, shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but may 
extend to ten thousand rupees.] 
183. Driving at excessive speed, etc.—(1) Whoever, drives 3[or causes any person who is employed 
by him or subjects someone under his control to drive] a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed 
limits referred to in section 112 shall be punishable 4[in the following manner, namely:— 
(i) where such motor vehicle is a light motor vehicle with fine which shall not be less than one 
thousand rupees but may extend to two thousand rupees; 
(ii) where such motor vehicle is a medium goods vehicle or a medium passenger vehicle or a 
heavy goods vehicle or a heavy passenger vehicle with fine which shall not be less than two thousand 
rupees, but may extend to four thousand rupees; and 
(iii) for the second or any subsequent offence under this sub-section the driving licence of such 
driver shall be impounded as per the provisions of the sub-section (4) of section 206.] 
5*  
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
*    
                    * 
(3) No person shall be convicted of an offence punishable under sub-section (1) solely on the 
evidence of one witness to the effect that in the opinion of the witness such person was driving at a speed 
which was unlawful, unless that opinion is shown to be based on an estimate obtained by the use of some 
mechanical 6[or electronic] device. 
(4) The publication of a time table under which, or the giving of any direction that, any journey or 
part of a journey is to be completed within a specified time shall, if in the opinion of the Court it is not 
practicable in the circumstances of the case for that journey or part of a journey to be completed in the 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 64, for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for S. 182A (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Ins. by, s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for the certain words (w.e.f. 1-9-2019).  
5. Sub-section (2) omitted by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Ins. by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

102 
 
specified time without contravening the speed limits referred to in section 112 be prima facie evidence 
that the person who published the time table or gave the direction has committed an offence punishable 
under 1[sub-section (1)]. 
184. Driving dangerously.—Whoever drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is 
dangerous to the public 2[or which causes a sense of alarm or distress to the occupants of the vehicle, 
other road users, and persons near roads,] having regard to all the circumstances of case including the 
nature, condition and use of the place where the vehicle is driven and the amount of traffic which actually 
is at the time or which might reasonably be expected to be in the place, shall be punishable for the first 
offence with imprisonment for a term 3[which may extend to one year but shall not be less than six 
months or with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both], and for any second or subsequent offence if committed within three years of the 
commission of a previous similar offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, 
or with fine 4[of ten thousand rupees], or with both. 
5[Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) jumping a red light; 
(b) violating a stop sign; 
(c) use of handheld communications devices while driving; 
(d) passing or overtaking other vehicles in a manner contrary to law; 
(e) driving against the authorised flow of traffic; or 
(f) driving in any manner that falls far below what would be expected of a competent and careful 
driver and where it would be obvious to a competent and careful driver that driving in that manner 
would be dangerous,  
shall amount to driving in such manner which is dangerous to the public.] 
185. Driving by a drunken person or by a person under the influence of drugs.—Whoever, while 
driving, or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle,— 
6[(a) has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg. per 100 ml. of blood detected in a test by a 
breath analyser, 7[or in any other test including a laboratory test,] or] 
(b) is under the influence of a drug to such an extent as to be incapable of exercising proper 
control over the vehicle, 
shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine 8[of ten thousand rupees], or with both; and for a second or subsequent offence, 9*** with 
imprisonment for term which may extend to two years, or with fine 10[of fifteen thousand rupees], or with 
both. 
11[Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “drug” means any intoxicant other 
than alcohol, natural or synthetic, or any natural material or any salt, or preparation of such substance or 
material as may be notified by the Central Government under this Act and includes a narcotic drug and 
psychotropic substance as defined in clause (xiv) and clause (xxiii) of section 2 of the Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985).] 
 
1. Subs. by 32 of 2019, s. 66, for “sub-section (2)” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by s. 67, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Subs. by s. 67, ibid., for “which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-
2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 67, ibid., for “which may extend to two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Ins. by s. 67, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 55, for Cl.  (a) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
7. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 68 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
8. Subs. by s. 68, ibid., for “which may extend to two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
9. The words “if committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar offence,” omitted by s. 68, ibid. (w.e.f. 
1-9-2019). 
10. Subs. by s. 68, ibid., for “which may extend to three thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
11. Subs. by s. 68, ibid., for the Explanation (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

103 
 
186. Driving when mentally or physically unfit to drive.—Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any 
public place when he is to his knowledge suffering from any disease or disability calculated to cause his 
driving of the vehicle to be a source of danger to the public, shall be punishable for the first offence with 
fine which may extend to 1[one thousand rupees] and for a second or subsequent offence with fine which 
may extend to 2[two thousand rupees]. 
187. Punishment for offences relating to accident.—Whoever fails to comply with the provisions 
of clause 3[(a)] of sub-section (1) of section 132 or section 133 or section 134 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 4[six months], or with fine 5[of five thousand rupees], or 
with both or, if having been previously convicted of an offence under this section, he is again convicted 
of an offence under this section, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 6[one year], or with 
fine 7[of ten thousand rupees], or with both. 
188. Punishment for abetment of certain offences.—Whoever abets the commission of an offence 
under section 184, section 185 or section 186 shall be punishable with the punishment provided for the 
offence. 
189. Racing and trials of speed.—Whoever without the written consent of the State Government 
permits or takes part in a race or trial of speed of any kind between motor vehicles in any public place 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 8[three months], or with fine 9[of 
five thousand rupees], or with both 10[and for a subsequent offence shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine of ten thousand rupees; or with both]. 
190. Using vehicle in unsafe condition.—(1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven 
in any public place a motor vehicle or trailer while the vehicle or trailer has any defect, which such person 
knows of or could have discovered by the exercise of ordinary care and which is calculated to render the 
driving of the vehicle a source of danger to persons and vehicles using such place, shall be punishable 
with fine 11[of one thousand five hundred rupees] or, if as a result of such defect an accident is caused 
causing bodily injury or damage to property, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine 12[of five thousand rupees], or with both 13[and for a subsequent offence shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with a fine of ten thousand 
rupees for bodily injury or damage to property]. 
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle, 
which violates the standards prescribed in relation to road safety, control of noise and air-pollution, shall 
be punishable for the first offence with 14[imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both and he shall be disqualified for holding 
licence for a period of three months] and for any second or subsequent offence with 15[imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with 
both]. 
(3) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle which 
violates the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder relating to the carriage of goods which are 
of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life, shall be punishable for the first offence 16[with a fine of 
ten thousand rupees and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months], or with 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 69, for “two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by s. 69, ibid., for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for “(c)” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for “which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
7. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for “which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
8. Subs. by s. 71, ibid., for “one month” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
9. Subs. by s. 71, ibid., for “which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
10. Ins. by s. 71, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
11. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
12. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
13. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
14. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “a fine of one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
15. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “a fine of two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
16. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “which may extend to three thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

104 
 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with both, and for any second or subsequent offence 
with fine 1[of twenty thousand rupees], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with both. 
191. [Sale of vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to condition contravening this Act.] Omitted by the Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 (32 of 2019), s. 73 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2[192. Using vehicle without registration.—(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a 
motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of section 39 shall be punishable for the first 
offence with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees 
for a second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the conveyance of 
persons suffering from sickness or injuries or for the transport of food or materials to relieve distress or of 
medical supplies for a like purpose: 
Provided that the persons using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority 
within seven days from the date of such use. 
(3) The court to which an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature specified 
in sub-section (1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding that no appeal 
lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made. 
3[Explanation.—Use of a motor vehicle in contravention of the provisions of section 56 shall be deemed to 
be a contravention of the provisions of section 39 and shall be punishable in the same manner as provided in 
sub-section (1).] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Rajasthan 
Amendment of Section 192, Central Act 59 of 1988.—In Section 192 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central 
Act 59 of 1988), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act, — 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the expression “with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees” as occurring 
between the expression “punishable for the first offence” and the expression “and for any second or subsequent 
offence”, the expression “with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees” and for the expression “with 
fine which may extend to three thousand rupees” as occurring between the expression “which may extend to six 
months or” and the expression “or with both”, the expression “with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand 
rupees” shall be substituted, and 
(b) After sub-section (1) as so amended, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-“Provided that, in a 
case of contravention of the provision of section 39 or of any condition of the permit relating to the maximum 
number of passengers or maximum weight of luggage that may be carried on the vehicle, the court may for any 
adequate or special reason to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a fine less than that laid down in this sub-
section.” 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 2 of 1993, s. 2] 
192A. Using vehicle without permit.—(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a 
motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 66 or in 
contravention of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the 
purpose for which the vehicle may be used, shall be punishable for the first offence with 4[imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months 5[or a fine of ten thousand rupees, or with both]] and for any 
subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less than 6[six 
months] or with fine 7[of ten thousand rupees] or with both: 
8*  
 
      * 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 (2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the 
conveyance of persons suffering from sickness or injury or for the transport of materials for repair or for 
the transport of food or materials to relieve distress or of medical supplies for a like purpose: 
 
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 72, for “which may extend to five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 56, for S. 192 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 74 (w.e.f. 1-10-2020).  
4. Ins. by s. 75, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for “and a fine of ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 13-01-2025). 
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 75, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
7. Subs. by s. 75, ibid., for “which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees”  
(w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
8. Proviso omitted by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 13-01-2025). 

105 
 
Provided that the person using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority 
within seven days from the date of such use. 
(3) The court to which an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub-section (1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding 
that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made.] 
1[192B. Offences relating to registration.—(1) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, fails to 
make an application for registration of such motor vehicle under sub-section (1) of section 41 shall be 
punishable with fine of five times the annual road tax or one-third of the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle 
whichever is higher. 
(2) Whoever, being a dealer, fails to make an application for the registration of a new motor vehicle 
under the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 41 shall be punishable with fine of fifteen times the 
annual road tax or the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle whichever is higher. 
(3) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, obtains a certificate of registration for such vehicle 
on the basis of documents which were, or by representation of facts which was, false in any material 
particular, or the engine number or the chassis number embossed thereon are different from such number 
entered in the certificate of registration shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than six months but may extend to one year and with fine equal to ten times the amount of the 
annual road tax or two-third the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle, whichever is higher. 
(4) Whoever, being a dealer, obtains a certificate of registration for such vehicle on the basis of 
documents which were, or by representation of facts which was, false in any material particular, or the 
engine number or the chassis number embossed thereon are different from such number entered in the 
certificate of registration shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but may extend to one year and with fine equal to ten times the amount of annual road tax or    
two-third the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle, whichever is higher.] 
193. Punishment of 2[agents, canvassers and aggregators] without proper authority.—3[1] 
Whoever engages himself as an agent or canvasser in contravention of the provisions of section 93 or of 
any rules made thereunder shall be punishable for the first offence with fine 4[of one thousand rupees] and 
for any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine 
5[of two thousand rupees], or with both. 
6[(2) Whoever engages himself as an aggregator in contravention of the provisions of section 93 or of 
any rules made there under shall be punishable with fine up to one lakh rupees but shall not be less than 
twenty-five thousand rupees. 
(3) Whoever, while operating as an aggregator contravenes a condition of the licence granted under 
sub-section (1) of section 93, not designated by the State Government as a material condition, shall be 
punishable with fine of five thousand rupees.] 
194. Driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight.—7[(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or 
causes or allows a motor vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 113 or                
section 114 or section 115 shall be punishable with 8*** fine 9[of twenty thousand rupees and an 
additional amount of two thousand rupees per tonne of excess load], together with the liability to pay 
charges for off-loading of the excess load.] 
10[Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move before such excess load is removed 
or is caused or allowed to be removed by the person in control of such motor vehicle.] 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 76 (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
2. Subs. by s. 77, ibid., for “agents and canvassers” (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
3. Section 193 numbered as sub-section (1) thereof by s. 77, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
4. Subs. by s. 77, ibid., for “which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Subs. by s. 77, ibid., for “which may extend to two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
6. Ins. by s. 77, ibid, (w.e.f. 1-4-2021). 
7. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 57, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
8. The word “minimum” omitted by Act 32 of 2019, s. 78 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
9. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for “of two thousand rupees and an additional amount of one thousand rupees per tonne of excess load” 
(w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
10. Ins. by s. 78, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019).  

106 
 
1[(1A) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be driven when such 
motor vehicle is loaded in such a manner that the load or any part thereof or anything extends laterally 
beyond the side of the body or to the front or to the rear or in height beyond the permissible limit shall be 
punishable with a fine of twenty thousand rupees, together with the liability to pay charges for off-loading 
of such load: 
Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move before such load is arranged in a 
manner such that there is no extension of the load laterally beyond the side of the body or to the front or 
to the rear or in height beyond the permissible limit: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply when such motor vehicle has been given 
an exemption by the competent authority authorised in this behalf, by the State Government or the Central 
Government, allowing the carriage of a particular load.] 
(2) Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit his vehicle to weighing after being 
directed to do so by an officer authorised in this behalf under section 114 or removes or causes the 
removal of the load or part of it prior to weighing shall be punishable with fine 2[of forty thousand 
rupees]. 
3[194A. Carriage of excess passengers.—Whoever drives a transport vehicle or causes or allows a 
transport vehicle to be driven while carrying more passengers than is authorised in the registration 
certificate of such transport vehicle or the permit conditions applicable to such transport vehicle shall be 
punishable with a fine of two hundred rupees per excess passenger: 
Provided that such transport vehicle shall not be allowed to move before the excess passengers are 
off-loaded and an alternative transport is arranged for such passengers. 
194B. Use of safety belts and the seating of children.—(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle without 
wearing a safety belt or carries passengers not wearing seat belts shall be punishable with a fine of one 
thousand rupees: 
Provided that the State Government, may by notification in the Official Gazette, exclude the 
application of this sub-section to transport vehicles to carry standing passengers or other specified classes 
of transport vehicles. 
(2) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be driven with a child who, 
not having attained the age of fourteen years, is not secured by a safety belt or a child restraint system 
shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees. 
194C. Penalty for violation of safety measures for motor cycle drivers and pillion riders.—
Whoever drives a motor cycle or causes or allows a motor cycle to be driven in contravention of the 
provisions of section 128 or the rules or regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with a fine of 
one thousand rupees and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months. 
194D. Penalty for not wearing protective headgear.—Whoever drives a motor cycle or causes or 
allows a motor cycle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 129 or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees and he shall be 
disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months. 
194E. Failure to allow free passage to emergency vehicles.—Whoever while driving a motor 
vehicle fails to draw to the side of the road, on the approach of a fire service vehicle or of an ambulance 
or other emergency vehicle as may be specified by the State Government, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with a fine of ten thousand rupees or with 
both. 
194F. Use of horns and silence zones.—Whoever— 
(a) while driving a motor vehicle— 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 78 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for “which may extend to three thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Ins. by s. 79, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

107 
 
(i) sounds the horn needlessly or continuously or more than necessary to ensure safety, or 
(ii) sounds the horn in an area with a traffic sign prohibiting the use of a horn, or 
(b) drives a motor vehicle which makes use of a cut-out by which exhaust gases are released other 
than through the silencer,  
shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees and for a second or subsequent offence with a fine 
of two thousand rupees.] 
195. [Imposition of minimum fine under certain circumstances.] Omitted by the Motor Vehicles 
(Amendment) Act, 2019 (32 of 2019), s. 80 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
196. Driving uninsured vehicle.—Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor 
vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 146 shall be punishable 1[for the first 
offence] with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine 2[of two thousand rupees], or 
with both 1[, and for a subsequent offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine of four thousand rupees, or with both]. 
197. Taking vehicle without authority.—(1) Whoever takes and drives away any motor vehicle 
without having either the consent of the owner thereof or other lawful authority shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine 3[of five thousand rupees], or with both. 
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if the Court is satisfied that such person 
acted in the reasonable belief that he had lawful authority or in the reasonable belief that the owner would 
in the circumstances of the case have given his consent if he had been asked therefor. 
(2) Whoever, unlawfully by force or threat of force or by any other form of intimidation, seizes or 
exercises control of a motor vehicle, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months, or with fine 3[of five thousand rupees], or with both. 
(3) Whoever attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) in 
relation to any motor vehicle, or abets the commission of any such act, shall also be deemed to have 
committed an offence under sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, sub-section (2). 
198. Unauthorised interference with vehicle.—Whoever otherwise than with lawful authority or 
reasonable execuse enters or mounts any stationary motor vehicle or tampers with the brake or any part of 
the mechanism of a motor vehicle shall be punishable 4[with fine of one thousand rupees]. 
5[198A. Failure to comply with standards for road design, construction and maintenance.—(1) 
Any designated authority, contractor, consultant or concessionaire responsible for the design or 
construction or maintenance of the safety standards of the road shall follow such design, construction and 
maintenance standards, as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time. 
(2) Where failure on the part of the designated authority, contractor, consultant or concessionaire 
responsible under sub-section (1) to comply with standards for road design, construction and 
maintenance, results in death or disability, such authority or contractor or concessionaire shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and the same shall be paid to the Fund 
constituted under section 164B. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), the court shall in particular have regard to the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) the characteristics of the road, and the nature and type of traffic which was reasonably 
expected to use it as per the design of road; 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 81. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Subs. by s. 81, ibid., for “which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. Subs. by s. 82, ibid., for “which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 83, ibid., for “with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees” (w.e.f 1-9-2019). 
5. Ins. by s. 84, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

108 
 
(b) the standard of maintenance norms applicable for a road of that character and use by such 
traffic; 
(c) the state of repair in which road users would have expected to find the road; 
(d) whether the designated authority responsible for the maintenance of the road knew, or could 
reasonably have been expected to know, that the condition of the part of the road to which the action 
relates was likely to cause danger to the road users; 
(e) whether the designated authority responsible for the maintenance of the road could not 
reasonably have been expected to repair that part of the road before the cause of action arose; 
(f) whether adequate warning notices through road signs, of its condition had been displayed; and 
(g) such other matters as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the term “contractor” shall include sub-contractors 
and all such persons who are responsible for any stage in the design, construction and maintenance of a 
stretch of road.] 
199. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “company”, means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
1[199A. Offences by juveniles.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
juvenile, the guardian of such juvenile or the owner of the motor vehicle shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render such guardian or owner liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the Court shall presume that the use of the motor 
vehicle by the juvenile was with the consent of the guardian of such juvenile or the owner of the motor 
vehicle, as the case may be. 
(2) In addition to the penalty under sub-section (1), such guardian or owner shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with a fine of twenty-five thousand rupees. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall not apply to such guardian or owner if 
the juvenile committing the offence had been granted a learner’s licence under section 8 or a driving 
licence and was operating a motor vehicle which such juvenile was licensed to operate. 
(4) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a juvenile, the registration of the motor 
vehicle used in the commission of the offence shall be cancelled for a period of twelve months. 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 85 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

109 
 
(5) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a juvenile, then, notwithstanding  
section 4 or section 7, such juvenile shall not be eligible to be granted a driving licence under section 9 or 
a learner’s licence under section 8 until such juvenile has attained the age of twenty-five years. 
(6) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a juvenile, then such juvenile shall be 
punishable with such fines as provided in the Act while any custodial sentence may be modified as per 
the provisions of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 (56 of 2000). 
199B. Revision of fines.—The fines as provided in this Act shall be increased by such amount not 
exceeding ten per cent. in value of the existing fines, on an annual basis on 1st day of April of each year 
from the date of commencement of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 (32 of 2019), as may be 
notified by the Central Government.] 
200. Composition of certain offences.—1[(1) Any offence whether committed before or after the 
commencement of this Act punishable under section 177, section 177A, section 178, section 179,             
section 180, section 181, section 182, sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of                     
section 182A, section 182B, sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 183, clause (c) of the 
Explanation to section 184, section 186, section 189, sub-section (2) of section 190, section 192,                     
section 192A, sub-section (3) of section 192B, section 194, section 194A, section 194B, section 194C, 
section 194D, section 194E, section 194F, section 196, section 198 and section 201, may, either before or 
after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and for such 
amount as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.] 
2[Provided that the State Government may, in addition to such amount, require the offender to 
undertake a period of community service.] 
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), the offender, if in custody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence: 
2[Provided that notwithstanding compounding under this section, such offence shall be deemed to be 
a previous commission of the same offence for the purpose of determining whether a subsequent offence 
has been committed: 
Provided further that compounding of an offence will not discharge the offender from proceedings 
under sub-section (4) of section 206 or the obligation to complete a driver refresher training course, or the 
obligation to complete community service, if applicable.] 
201. Penalty for causing obstruction to free flow of traffic.—(1) Whoever keeps a 3*** vehicle on 
any public place, in such a manner, so as to cause impediment to the free flow of traffic, shall be liable for 
penalty up to 4[five hundred rupees], so long as it remains in that position: 
Provided that the vehicle involved in accidents shall be liable for penalty only from the time of 
completion of inspection formalities under the law: 
5[Provided further that where the vehicle is removed by 6[an agency authorised by the Central 
Government or State Government, removal charges] shall be recovered from the vehicle owner or person 
in-charge of such vehicle.] 
7[(2) Penalties or 8[removal charges] under this section shall be recovered by such officer or authority 
as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise.] 
9[(3) Sub-section (1) shall not apply where the motor vehicle has suffered an unforeseen breakdown 
and is in the process of being removed.] 
9[Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “removal charges” includes any costs involved in 
the removal of the motor vehicle from one location to another and also includes any costs related to 
storage of such motor vehicle.] 
 
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Sch. for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 13-01-2025). 
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 86 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
3. The word “disabled” omitted by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
4. Subs. by s. 87, ibid., for “fifty rupees per hour” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
5. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 59 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 87, for “a Government agency, towing charges” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
7. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 59, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
8. Subs. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 87, for “towing charges” (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
9. Ins. by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

110 
 
202. Power to arrest without warrant.—(1) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant 
any person who in his presence commits an offence punishable under section 184 or section 185 or 
section 197: 
Provided that any person so arrested in connection with an offence punishable under section 185 
shall, within two hours of his arrest, be subjected to a medical examination referred to in sections 203 and 
204 by a registered medical practitioner failing which he shall be released from custody. 
1[(2) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant any person, who has committed an 
offence under this Act, if such person refuses to give his name and address.] 
(3) A police officer arresting without warrant the driver of a motor vehicle shall if the circumstances 
so require take or cause to be taken any steps he may consider proper for the temporary disposal of the 
vehicle. 
203. Breath tests.—2[(1) A police officer in uniform or an officer of the Motor Vehicles Department, 
as may be authorised in this behalf by that Department, may require any person driving or attempting to 
drive a motor vehicle in a public place to provide one or more specimens of breath for breath test there or 
nearby, if such police officer or officer has any reasonable cause to suspect him of having committed an 
offence under section 185: 
Provided that requirement for breath test shall be made (unless it is made) as soon as reasonably 
practicable after the commission of such offence.] 
(2) If a motor vehicle is involved in an accident in a public place and a police officer in uniform has 
any reasonable cause to suspect that the person who was driving the motor vehicle at the time of the 
accident, had alcohol in his blood or that he was driving under the influence of a drug referred to in 
section 185 he may require the person so driving the motor vehicle, to provide a specimen of his breath 
for a breath test:— 
(a) in the case of a person who is at a hospital as an indoor patient, at the hospital, 
(b) in the case of any other person, either at or near the place where the requirement is made, or, 
if the police officer thinks fit, at a police station specified by the police officer: 
Provided that a person shall not be required to provide such a specimen while at a hospital as an 
indoor patient if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case is not first notified of 
the proposal to make the requirement or objects to the provision of a specimen on the ground that its 
provision or the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or treatment of the 
patient. 
(3) If it appears to a police officer in uniform, in consequence of a breath test carried out by him on 
any person under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), that the device by means of which the test has been 
carried out indicates the presence of alcohol in the person’s blood, the police officer may arrest that 
person without warrant except while that person is at a hospital as an indoor patient. 
(4) If a person, required by a police officer under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) to provide a 
specimen of breath for a breath test, refuses or fails to do so and the police officer has reasonable cause to 
suspect him of having alcohol in his blood, the police officer may arrest him without warrant except while 
he is at a hospital as an indoor patient. 
(5) A person arrested under this section shall while at a police station, be given an opportunity to 
provide a specimen of breath for a breath test there. 
(6) The results of a breath test made in pursuance of the provisions of this section shall be admissible 
in evidence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “breath test”, means a test for the purpose of 
obtaining an indication of the presence of alcohol in a person’s blood carried out, on one or more 
 
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 60, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

111 
 
specimens of breath provided by that person, by means of a device of a type approved by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of such a test. 
204. Laboratory test.—(1) A person, who has been arrested under section 203 may, while at a police 
station, be required by a police officer to provide to such registered medical practitioner as may be 
produced by such police officer, a specimen of his blood for a Laboratory test,— 
(a) it appears to the police officer that the device, by means of which breath test was taken in 
relation to such person, indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood of such person, or 
(b) such person, when given the opportunity to submit to a breath test, has refused, omitted or 
failed to do so: 
Provided that where the person required to provide such specimen is a female and the registered 
medical practitioner produced by such police officer is a male medical practitioner, the specimen shall be 
taken only in the presence of a female, whether a medical practitioner or not. 
(2) A person while at a hospital as an indoor patient may be required by a police officer to provide at 
the hospital a specimen of his blood for a laboratory test:— 
(a) if it appears to the police officer that the device by means of which test is carried out in 
relation to the breath of such person indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood of such person, or 
(b) if the person having been required, whether at the hospital or elsewhere, to provide a 
specimen of breath for a breath test, has refused, omitted or failed to do so and a police officer has 
reasonable cause to suspect him of having alcohol in his blood: 
Provided that a person shall not be required to provide a specimen of his blood for a laboratory test 
under this sub-section if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case is not first 
notified of the proposal to make the requirement or objects to the provision of such specimen on the 
ground that its provision or the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or 
treatment of the patient. 
(3) The results of a laboratory test made in pursuance of this section shall be admissible in evidence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “laboratory test” means the analysis of a specimen of 
blood made at a laboratory established, maintained or recognised by the Central Government or a State 
Government. 
205. Presumption of unfitness to drive.—In any proceeding for an offence punishable under       
section 185 if it is proved that the accused, when requested by a police officer at any time so to do, had 
refused, omitted or failed to consent to the taking of or providing a specimen of his breath for a breath test 
or a specimen of his blood for a laboratory test, his refusal, omission or failure may, unless reasonable 
cause therefor is shown, be presumed to be a circumstance supporting any evidence given on behalf of the 
prosecution, or rebutting any evidence given on behalf of the defence, with respect to his condition at that 
time. 
206. Power of police officer to impound document.—(1) Any police officer or other person 
authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he has reason to believe that any identification 
mark carried on a motor vehicle or any licence, permit, certificate of registration, certificate of insurance 
or other document produced to him by the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle is a false 
document within the meaning of section 464 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), seize the mark or 
document and call upon the driver or owner of the vehicle to account for his possession of or the presence 
in the vehicle of such mark or document. 
(2) Any police officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he 
has reason to believe that the driver of a motor vehicle who is charged with any offence under this Act 
may abscond or otherwise avoid the service of a summons, seize any licence held by such driver and 
forward it to the Court taking cognizance of the offence and the said Court shall on the first appearance of 

112 
 
such driver before it, return the licence to him in exchange for the temporary acknowledgment given 
under sub-section (3). 
(3) A police officer or other person seizing a licence under sub-section (2) shall give to the person 
surrendering the licence a temporary acknowledgment therefor and such acknowledgment shall authorise 
the holder to drive until the licence has been returned to him or until such date as may be specified by the 
police officer or other person in the acknowledgment, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that if any magistrate, police officer or other person authorised by the State Government in 
this behalf is, on an application made to him, satisfied that the licence cannot be, or has not been, returned 
to the holder thereof before the date specified in the acknowledgment for any reason for which the holder 
is not responsible, the magistrate, police officer or other person, as the case may be, may extend the 
period of authorization to drive to such date as may be specified in the acknowledgment. 
1[(4) A police officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government shall, if he has 
reason to believe that the driver of a motor vehicle has committed an offence under any of sections 183, 
184, 185, 189, 190, 194C, 194D, or 194E, seize the driving licence held by such driver and forward it to 
the licensing authority for disqualification or revocation proceedings under section 19: 
Provided that the person seizing the licence shall give to the person surrendering the licence a 
temporary acknowledgement therefor, but such acknowledgement shall not authorise the holder 
to drive until the licence has been returned to him.] 
207. Power to detain vehicles used without certificate of registration permit, etc.—(1) Any police 
officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he has reason to believe 
that a motor vehicle has been or is being used in contravention of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 
or section 39 or without the permit required by sub-section (1) of section 66 or in contravention of any 
condition of such permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the purpose for which the 
vehicle may be used, seize and detain the vehicle, in the prescribed manner and for this purpose take or 
cause to be taken any steps he may consider proper for the temporary safe custody of the vehicle: 
Provided that where any such officer or person has reason to believe that a motor vehicle has been or 
is being used in contravention of section 3 or section 4 or without the permit required by sub-section (1) 
of section 66 he may, instead of seizing the vehicle, seize the certificate of registration of the vehicle and 
shall issue an acknowledgment in respect thereof. 
(2) Where a motor vehicle has been seized and detained under sub-section (1), the owner or person in 
charge of the motor vehicle may apply to the transport authority or any officer authorised in this behalf by 
the State Government together with the relevant documents for the release of the vehicle and such 
authority or officer may, after verification of such documents, by order release the vehicle subject to such 
conditions as the authority or officer may deem fit to impose. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Rajasthan 
Amendment of Section 207, Central Act 59 of 1988.—In the proviso to sub-section (1) of                
Section 207 of the principal Act, the expression “or without the permit required by sub- section (1) of 
Section 66” as occurring between the expression “Section 3 or section 4” and the expression “he may” 
shall be deleted. 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 2 of 1993, s. 3]. 
208. Summary disposal of cases.—(1) The Court taking cognizance of any offence (other than an 
offence which the Central Government may by rules specify in this behalf) under this Act,— 
(i) may, if the offence is an offence punishable with imprisonment under this Act; and 
(ii) shall, in any other case,  
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 88 (w.e.f. 1-10-2020). 

113 
 
state upon the summons to be served on the accused person that he— 
(a) may appear by pleader or in person; or 
(b) may, by a specified date prior to the hearing of the charge, plead guilty to the charge and remit 
to the Court, by money order, such sum (not exceeding the maximum fine that may be imposed for 
the offence) as the Court may specify, and the plea of guilt indicated in the money order coupon 
itself: 
Provided that the Court shall, in the case of any of the offences referred to in sub-section (2), state 
upon the summons that the accused person, if he pleads guilty, shall so plead in the manner specified in 
clause (b) and shall forward his driving licence to the Court with his letter containing such plea. 
(2) Where the offence dealt with in accordance with sub-section (1) is an offence specified by the 
Central Government by rules for the purposes of this sub-section, the Court shall, if the accused person 
pleads guilty to the charge and forward his driving licence to the Court with the letter containing his plea, 
make an endorsement of such conviction on his driving licence. 
(3) Where an accused person pleads guilty and remits the sum specified and has complied with the 
provisions of sub-section (1), or as the case may be, sub-sections (1) and (2), no further proceedings in 
respect of the offence shall be taken against him nor shall he be liable, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Act, to be disqualified for holding or obtaining a licence by reason of his having 
pleaded guilty. 
209. Restriction on conviction.—No person prosecuted for an offence punishable under section 183 
or section 184 shall be convicted unless— 
(a) he was warned at the time the offence was committed that the question of prosecuting him 
would be taken into consideration, or 
(b) within fourteen days from the commission of the offence, a notice specifying the nature of the 
offence and the time and place where it is alleged to have been committed was served on or sent by 
registered post to him or the person registered as the owner of the vehicle at the time of the 
commission of the offence, or 
(c) within twenty-eight days of the commission of the offence, a summons for the offence was 
served on him: 
Provided that nothing, in this section shall apply where the Court is satisfied that— 
(a) the failure to serve the notice or summons referred to in this sub-section was due to the fact 
that neither the name and address of the accused nor the name and address of the registered owner of 
the vehicle could with reasonable diligence have been ascertained in time, or 
(b) such failure was brought about by the conduct of the accused. 
210. Courts to send intimation about conviction.—Every Court by which any person holding a 
driving licence is convicted of an offence under this Act or of an offence in the commission of which a 
motor vehicle was used, shall send intimation to— 
(a) the licensing authority which issued the driving licence, and 
(b) the licensing authority by whom the licence was last renewed,  
and every such intimation shall state the name and address of the holder of the licence, the licence 
number, the date of issue and renewal of the same, the nature of the offence, the punishment awarded for 
the same and such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
1[210A. Power of State Government to increase penalties.—Subject to conditions made by the 
Central Government, a State Government, shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify a 
multiplier, not less than one and not greater than ten, to be applied to each fine under this Act and such 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 89 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

114 
 
modified fine, shall be in force in such State and different multipliers may be applied to different classes 
of motor vehicles as may be classified by the State Government for the purpose of this section. 
210B. Penalty for offence committed by an enforcing authority.—Any authority that is 
empowered to enforce the provisions of this Act shall, if such authority commits an offence under this 
Act, shall be liable for twice the penalty corresponding to that offence under this Act. 
210C. Power of Central Government to make rules.—The Central Government may make rules 
for— 
(a) design, construction and maintenance standards for National highways; 
(b) such other factors as may be taken into account by the Court under sub-section (3) of             
section 198A; 
(c) any other matter which is, or has to be, prescribed by the Central Government. 
210D. Power of State Government to make rules.—The State Government may make rules for 
design, construction and maintenance standards for roads other than national highways, and for any other 
matter which is, or may be, prescribed by the State Government.] 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
211. Power to levy fee.—Any rule which the Central Government or the State Government is 
empowered to make under this Act may, notwithstanding the absence of any express provision to that 
effect, provide for the levy of such fees in respect of applications, amendment of documents, issue of 
certificates, licences, permits, tests, endorsements, badges, plates, countersignatures, authorisation, supply 
of statistics or copies of documents or orders and for any other purpose or matter involving the rendering 
of any service by the officers or authorities under this Act or any rule made thereunder as may be 
considered necessary: 
Provided that the Government may, if it considers necessary so to do, in the public interest, by 
general or special order, exempt any class of persons from the payment of any such fee either in part or in 
full. 
1[211A. Use of electronic forms and documents.—(1) Where any provision of this Act or the rules 
and regulations made there under provide for— 
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office, authority, body or 
agency owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government in a particular 
manner; 
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction, approval or endorsement, by whatever name 
called in a particular manner; or 
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner,  
then notwithstanding anything contained in such provision, such requirement shall be deemed to have 
been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as the case may be, is effected by means of 
such electronic form as may be prescribed by the Central Government or the State Government, as the 
case may be. 
(2) The Central Government or the State Government shall, for the purpose of sub-section (1), 
prescribe— 
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic forms and documents shall be filed, created or 
issued; and 
(b) the manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing, creation or issue of any 
electronic document under clause (a).] 
212. Publication, commencement and laying of rules and notifications.—(1) The power to make 
rules under this Act is subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication. 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 90 (w.e.f. 1-10-2020).  

115 
 
(2) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall unless some 
later date is appointed, come into force on the date of such publication. 
(3) Every rule made by any State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before 
the State Legislature. 
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act, every scheme made by the Central 
Government under sub-section (1) of section 75 and sub-section (1) of section 163 and every notification 
issued by the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 41, sub-section (1) of section 58, 
sub-section (1) of section 59, the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 112, 1[section 118] 2[sub-section (4) 
of section 163A] 3[section 164, section 177A] and sub-section (4) of section 213 shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule, scheme or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or 
scheme should not be made or the notification should not be issued, the rule, scheme or notification shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule, scheme or notification. 
1[(5) Every notification issued by the State Government under section 210A shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House, while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, the 
House agrees or both Houses agree, as the case may be, in making any modification in the notification or 
the House agrees or both Houses agree, as the case may be, that the notification should not be issued, the 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notification.] 
213. Appointment of motor vehicles officers.—(1) The State Government may, for the purpose of 
carrying into effect the provisions of this Act, establish a Motor Vehicles Department and appoint as 
officers thereof such persons as it thinks fit. 
(2) Every such officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860). 
(3) The State Government may make rules to regulate the discharge by officers of the Motor Vehicles 
Department of their functions and in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power to prescribe the uniform to be worn by them, the authorities to which they shall be subordinate, the 
duties to be performed by them, the powers (including the powers exercisable by police officers under 
this Act) to be exercised by them, and the conditions governing the exercise of such powers. 
(4) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of the Act, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, prescribe the minimum qualifications which the said officers or any class thereof shall 
possess for being appointed as such. 
(5) In addition to the powers that may be conferred on any officer of the Motor Vehicles Department 
under sub-section (3), such officer as may be empowered by the State Government in this behalf shall 
also have the power to,— 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder are being observed; 
 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 91 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 
2. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 62 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 91 (w.e.f. 1-10-2020). 

116 
 
(b) with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and search any premises which is in 
the occupation of a person who, he has reason to believe, has committed an offence under this Act or 
in which a motor vehicle in respect of which such offence has been committed is kept: 
Provided that,— 
(i) any such search without a warrant shall be made only by an officer of the rank of a 
gazetted officer; 
(ii) where the offence is punishable with fine only the search shall not be made after sunset 
and before sunrise; 
(iii) where the search is made without a warrant, the gazetted officer concerned shall record 
in writing the grounds for not obtaining a warrant and report to his immediate superior that such 
search has been made; 
(c) examine any person and require the production of any register or other document maintained 
in pursuance of this Act, and take on the spot or otherwise statements of any person which he may 
consider necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act; 
(d) seize or take copies of any registers or documents or portions thereof as he may consider 
relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been committed;  
(e) launch prosecutions in respect of any offence under this Act and to take a bond for ensuring 
the attendance of the offender before any court; 
(f) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub-section to answer any question or make 
any statement tending to incriminate himself. 
(6) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, so far as may be apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure under the authority of 
any warrant issued under section 94 of that Code. 
214. Effect of appeal and revision on orders passed by original authority.—(1) Where an appeal 
has been preferred or an application for revision has been made against any order passed by an original 
authority under this Act, the appeal or the application for revision shall not operate as a stay of the order 
passed by the original authority and such order shall remain in force pending the disposal of the appeal or 
the application for revision, as the case may be, unless the prescribed appellate authority or revisional 
authority otherwise directs. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if an application made by a person for the 
renewal of permit has been rejected by the original authority and such person has preferred an appeal or 
made an application for revision under this Act against such rejection, the appellate authority or, as the 
case may be, the revisional authority may by order direct that the permit shall, notwithstanding the 
expiration of the term specified therein, continue to be valid until the appeal or application for revision is 
disposed of. 
(3) No order made by a competent authority under this Act shall be reversed or altered on appeal or 
revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the proceedings, unless it appears to the 
prescribed appellate authority or revisional authority, as the case may be, that such error, omission or 
irregularity has, in fact, occasioned a failure of justice. 
215. Road Safety Councils and Committees.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, constitute for the country a National Road Safety Council consisting of a Chairman 
and such other members as that Government considers necessary and on such terms and conditions as that 
Government may determine. 
(2) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the State a State 
Road Safety Council consisting of a Chairman and such other members as that Government considers 
necessary and on such terms and conditions as that Government may determine. 

117 
 
(3) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute District Road Safety 
Committee for each district in the State consisting of a Chairman and such other members as that 
Government considers necessary and on such terms and conditions as that Government may determine. 
1[Provided that where a State Government has not constituted the District Road Safety Committee, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Committee for such 
District, consisting of a Chairman and such other members as it considers necessary and on such terms 
and conditions as it may determine.] 
(4) The Councils and Committees referred to in this section shall discharge such functions relating to 
the road safety programmes as the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
may, having regard to the objects of the Act, specify. 
2[215A. Power of Central Government and State Government to delegate.—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act,— 
(a) the Central Government shall have the power to delegate any power or functions that have 
been conferred upon it by the Act to any public servant or public authority and authorise such public 
servant or public authority to discharge any of its powers, functions and duties under this Act; 
(b) the State Government shall have the power to delegate any power or functions that have been 
conferred upon it by the Act to any public servant or public authority and authorise such public 
servant or public authority to discharge any of its powers, functions and duties under this Act. 
215B. National Road Safety Board.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a National Road Safety Board consisting of a Chairman, such number of 
representatives from the State Governments, and such other members as it may consider necessary and on 
such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) The National Board shall render advice to the Central Government or State Government, as the 
case may be, on all aspects pertaining to road safety and traffic management including, but not limited 
to,— 
(a) the standards of design, weight, construction, manufacturing process, operation and 
maintenance of motor vehicles and of safety equipment; 
(b) the registration and licensing of motor vehicles; 
(c) the formulation of standards for road safety, road infrastructure and control of traffic; 
(d) the facilitation of safe and sustainable utilisation of road transport ecosystem; 
(e) the promotion of new vehicle technology; 
(f) the safety of vulnerable road users; 
(g) programmes for educating and sensitising drivers and other road users; and 
(h) such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time. 
215C. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may make 
rules for the purposes of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the use of electronic forms and means for the filing of documents, issue or grant of licence, 
permit, sanction, approval or endorsements and the receipt or payment of money as referred to in 
section 211A; 
(b) the minimum qualifications which the Motor Vehicles Department officers or any class 
thereof shall be required to possess for appointment as such, as referred to in sub-section (4) of 
section 213; 
(c) the terms and conditions of appointment of Chairman and Members of the National Road 
Safety Board under sub-section (1) of section 215B; 
(d) the other functions of the National Road Safety Board under sub-section (2) of section 215B; 
and 
 
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 13-01-2025). 
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 2019, s. 92 (w.e.f. 1-9-2019). 

118 
 
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by rules by the Central Government. 
215D. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purposes of carrying into effect, the provisions of this Chapter, other than the matters specified in 
section 215C. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the use of electronic forms and means for the filing of documents, issue or grant of licence, 
permit, sanction, approval or endorsements and the receipt or payment of money as referred to in 
section 211A; 
(b) the duties and functions of the officers of the Motor Vehicle Department, the powers to be 
exercised by such officers (including the powers exercisable by police officers under this Act) and the 
conditions governing the exercise of such powers, the uniform to be worn by them, the authorities to 
which they shall be subordinate as referred to in sub-section (3) of section 213; 
(c) such other powers as may be exercised by officers of the Motor Vehicles Department as 
referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (5) of section 213; and 
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by rules by the State Government.] 
216. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
217. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939) and any law corresponding 
to that Act in force in any State immediately before the commencement of this Act in that State (hereafter 
in this section referred to as the repealed enactments) are hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by sub-section (1) of the repealed enactments,— 
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, order or notice issued, or any appointment or declaration 
made, or exemption granted, or any confiscation made, or any penalty or fine imposed, any forfeiture, 
cancellation or any other thing done, or any other action taken under the repealed enactments, and in 
force immediately before such commencement shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been issued, made, granted, done or taken under the 
corresponding provision of this Act; 
(b) any certificate of fitness or registration or licence or permit issued or granted under the 
repealed enactments shall continue to have effect after such commencement under the same 
conditions and for the same period as if this Act had not been passed; 
(c) any document referring to any of the repealed enactments or the provisions thereof, shall be 
construed as referring to this Act or to the corresponding provision of this Act; 
(d) the assignment of distinguishing marks by the registering authority and the manner of display 
on motor vehicles in accordance with the provision of the repealed enactments shall, after the 
commencement of this Act, continue to remain in force until a notification under sub-section (6) of 
section 41 of this Act is issued; 
(e) any scheme made under section 68C of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939) or under the 
corresponding law, if any, in force in any State and pending immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 100 of this Act; 

119 
 
(f) the permits issued under sub-section (1A) of section 68F of the Motor Vehicles Act,                   
1939 (4 of 1939), or under the corresponding provision, if any, in force in any State immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall continue to remain in force until the approved scheme 
under Chapter VI of this Act is published. 
(3) Any penalty payable under any of the repealed enactments may be recovered in the manner 
provided by or under this Act, but without prejudice to any action already taken for the recovery of such 
penalty under the repealed enactments. 
(4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general 
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeals. 
1[217A. Renewal of permits, driving licences and registration granted under the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1939.—Notwithstanding the repeal by sub-section (1) of section 217 of the enactments referred to in 
that sub-section, any certificate of fitness or registration or licence or permit issued or granted under the 
said enactments may be renewed under this Act.] 
 
 
 
 
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2000, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 

120 
 
1[2[THE FIRST SCHEDULE]] 
MANDATORY SIGNS OF SCHEDULE OF THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988  
 
 
 
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 475(E) dated 1-7-1989.    
2. The Schedule renumbered as the First Schedule thereof by Act 54 of 1994, s. 63 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

122 
 
 
 
 
 

123 
 
 

124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

158 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

161 
 
 

162 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

163 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

169 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

171 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

172 
 
 
 
 
“Explanatory Notes” 
(i) Normal size, wherever specified is the minimum size of the sign which is intended to be used in 
rural areas on highways declared to be National Highways or State Highways under any law for the time 
being in force in such rural areas,  
(ii) The Small Size, wherever specified is the minimum size of the sign which is intended to be used—  
(a) on all roads, other than the said National Highways and the State Highways, in the rural areas, 
and  
(b) in all roads within the urban areas:  
Provided that sign of any appropriate size may be used on bollards or alongside traffic light signals on 
such roads,  
     (iii) the colour scheme of these signs shall be as specified therein and the reverse side of all such sign 
plates shall be painted grey, 
     (iv) the posts of all these signs shall be painted in 25 cms. wide bands, alternatively black and white 
and the lowest band next to the ground shall be black,  
     (v) the definition plate, whenever specified with a sign or where required to make the meaning of a 
sign more explicit shall have white background, black border 20 mm. wide and shall be of adequate size 
for legibility but not too large as to be obtrusive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

173 
 
 
1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE.—[Schedule for compensation for third party fatal accidents/injury cases 
claims] Omitted by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 (32 of 2019), s. 93 (w.e.f. 1-4-2022).]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Subs. by S.O. 2022(E), for the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 22-5-2018). 

174 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), consolidates and amends the law relating to motor 
vehicles. This has been amended several times to keep it up to date. The need was, however, felt that this 
Act should, now inter aria, take into account also changes in the road transport technology, pattern of 
passenger and freight movements, development of the road network in the country and particularly the 
improve techniques in the motor vehicles management. 
2. Various Committees like National Transport Policy Committee, National Police Commission, Road 
Safety Committee, Low Powered Two-wheelers Committee, as also the Law Commission have gone into 
different aspects of road transport. They have recommended updating, simplification and rationalization 
of this law. Several Members of Parliament have also urged for comprehensive review of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939, to make it relevant to the modern-day requirements. 
3. A Working Group was, therefore, constituted in January, 1984 to review all the provisions of the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 and to submit draft proposals for a comprehensive legislation to replace the 
existing Act. This Working Group took into account the suggestions and recommendations earlier made 
by various bodies and institutions like Central Institute of Road Transport Automotive Research 
Association of India, and other transport organisations including the manufacturers and the general 
public. Besides obtaining comments of State Governments on the recommendations of the Working 
Group, these were discussed in a specially convened meeting of Transport Ministers of all States and 
Union territories. Some of the more important modifications so suggested related for taking care of- 
(a) the fast increasing number of both commercial vehicles and personal vehicles in the country; 
(b) the need for encouraging adoption of higher technology in automotive sector; 
(c) the greater flow of passenger and freight with the least impediments so that islands of isolations 
are not created leading to regional or local imbalances; 
(d) concern for road safety standards, and pollution-control measures, standards for transportation 
of hazardous and explosive materials; 
(e) simplification of procedure and policy liberalizations for private sector operations in the road 
transport field; and 
(f) need for effective ways of tracking down traffic offenders. 
4. The Supreme Court in M. K. Kunhimohammed vs. P. A. Ahmedkutty, A.I.R. 1937 S.C. page 2158, 
has made certain suggestions to raise the limit of compensation payable as a result of motor accidents is 
respect of death and permanent disablement in the event of there being no proof of fault on the part of the 
person involved in the accident and also in hit and run motor accidents and remove certain disparities in 
the liability of the insurer to pay compensation depending upon the class or type of vehicles involved in 
the accident. The above suggestions made by the Supreme Court have been incorporated in the Bill. 
5. The proposed legislation has been prepared in the light of the above background. Some of the more 
important provisions of the Bill provide for the following matters, namely:— 
(a) rationalization of certain definitions with additions of certain new definitions of new types of 
vehicles: 
(b) stricter procedures relating to grant of driving licences and the period of validity thereof; 
(c) laying down of standards for the components and parts of motor vehicles; 
(d) standards for anti-pollution control devices; 
(e) provision for issuing fitness certificates of vehicles also by the authorised testing stations; 
(f) enabling provision for updating the system of registration marks; 
(g) liberalised schemes for grant of stage carriage permits on non-nationalised routes, all-India 
Tourist permits and also national permits for goods carriages; 
(h) administration of the Solatium Scheme by the General Insurance Corporation; 

175 
 
(i) Provision for enhanced compensation in cases of “no fault liability” and in hit and run motor 
accidents; 
(j) provision for payment of compensation by the insurer to the extent of actual liability to the 
victims of motor accidents irrespective of the class of vehicles; 
(k) maintenance of State registers for driving licences and vehicle registration: 
(l) constitution of Road Safety Councils. 
6. The Bill also seeks to provide for more deterrent punishment in the cases of certain offences. 
7. The Notes on clauses explain the provisions of the Bill. 
8. The Bill seeks achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
RAJESH PILOT. 
 
     NEW DELHI;   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 9th May, 1988. 
 
 
 
 


================================================================================
  📄 Right to Information Act 2005.pdf
     Pages: 25
================================================================================
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Right to Information Act, 2005  
(ACT NO. 22 OF 2005) 
[As on the 18th November, 2025] 
 
 

2 
 
LIST OF AMENDING ACTS 
1. 
The Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 (24 of 2019). 
2. 
The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019). 
3. 
The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (22 of 2023). 
 
_______ 
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED 
Cl., cls.          
. 
. 
. 
.             .          for             Clause, clauses. 
Ins.                 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 .           ,,               Inserted. 
Notifn. 
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 .  
,, 
    Notification. 
S., ss. 
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 .  
,, 
    Section, sections. 
Sch. 
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 .  
,, 
    Schedule. 
Subs. 
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 .  
,, 
    Substituted. 
w.e.f. 
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 .  
,, 
    with effect from. 
 
 

3 
 
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005 
__________________ 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________________ 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
 
CHAPTER II 
RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 
3. Right to information. 
4. Obligations of public authorities. 
5. Designation of Public Information Officers. 
6. Request for obtaining information. 
7. Disposal of request. 
8. Exemption from disclosure of information. 
9. Grounds for rejection to access in certain cases. 
10. Severability. 
11. Third party information. 
 
CHAPTER III 
THE CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION 
12. Constitution of Central Information Commission. 
13. Terms of office and conditions of service. 
14. Removal of Chief Information Commissioner or Information Commissioner. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
THE STATE INFORMATION COMMISSION 
15. Constitution of State Information Commission. 
16. Term of office and conditions of service. 
17. Removal of State Chief Information Commissioner or State Information Commissioner. 
 
CHAPTER V 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONS, APPEAL AND PENALTIES 
18. Powers and functions of Information Commissions. 
 

4 
 
SECTIONS 
19. Appeal. 
20. Penalties. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
22. Act to have overriding effect. 
23. Bar of jurisdiction of courts. 
24. Act not to apply to certain organisations. 
25. Monitoring and reporting. 
26. Appropriate Government to prepare programmes. 
27. Power to make rules by appropriate Government. 
28. Power to make rules by competent authority. 
29. Laying of rules. 
30. Power to remove difficulties. 
31. Repeal. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
 
 

5 
 
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005 
ACT NO. 22 OF 2005 
[15th June, 2005.] 
An Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to 
secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote 
transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, the constitution of a 
Central Information Commission and State Information Commissions and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the Constitution of India has established democratic Republic; 
AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are 
vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities 
accountable to the governed; 
AND WHEREAS revelation of information in actual practice is likely to conflict with other public 
interests including efficient operations of the Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and 
the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to harmonise these conflicting interests while preserving the 
paramountcy of the democratic ideal; 
Now, THEREFORE, it is expendient to provide for furnishing certain information to citizens who 
desire to have it. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Right to Information 
Act, 2005. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 4, sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 5, sections 12, 
13, 15,16, 24, 27 and 28 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions of this Act shall 
come into force on the one hundred and twentieth day of its enactment. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in relation to a public authority which is established, 
constituted, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly— 
(i) by the Central Government or the Union territory administration, the Central Government; 
(ii) by the State Government, the State Government; 
(b) “Central Information Commission” means the Central Information Commission constituted 
under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(c) “Central Public Information Officer” means the Central Public Information Officer designated 
under sub-section (1) and includes a Central Assistant Public Information Officer designated as such 
under sub-section (2) of section 5; 
(d) “Chief Information Commissioner” and “Information Commissioner” mean the Chief 
Information Commissioner and Information Commissioner appointed under sub-section (3) of    
section 12; 
 
 
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31-10-2019). 

6 
 
(e) “competent authority” means— 
(i) the Speaker in the case of the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State 
or a Union territory having such Assembly and the Chairman in the case of the Council of States 
or Legislative Council of a State; 
(ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme Court; 
(iii) the Chief Justice of the High Court in the case of a High Court; 
(iv) the President or the Governor, as the case may be, in the case of other authorities 
established or constituted by or under the Constitution; 
(v) the administrator appointed under article 239 of the Constitution; 
(f) “information” means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-mails, 
opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, 
models, data material held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which 
can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the appropriate Government 
or the competent authority, as the case may be; 
(h) “public authority” means any authority or body or institution of self- government established 
or constituted— 
(a) by or under the Constitution; 
(b) by any other law made by Parliament; 
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature; 
(d) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government, 
and includes any— 
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed; 
(ii) non-Government organisation substantially financed, 
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government; 
(i) “record” includes— 
(a) any document, manuscript and file; 
(b) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document; 
(c) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm (whether enlarged or 
not); and 
(d) any other material produced by a computer or any other device; 
(j) “right to information” means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held 
by or under the control of any public authority and includes the right to— 
(i) inspection of work, documents, records; 
(ii) taking notes, extracts or certified copies of documents or records; 
(iii) taking certified samples of material; 
(iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any 
other electronic mode or through printouts where such information is stored in a computer or in 
any other device; 
(k) “State Information Commission” means the State Information Commission constituted under 
sub-section (1) of section 15; 
 

7 
 
(l) “State Chief Information Commissioner” and “State Information Commissioner” mean the 
State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioner appointed under sub-
section (3) of section 15; 
(m) “State Public Information Officer” means the State Public Information Officer designated 
under sub-section (1) and includes a State Assistant Public Information Officer designated as such 
under sub-section (2) of section 5; 
(n) “third party” means a person other than the citizen making a request for information and 
includes a public authority. 
CHAPTER II 
RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 
3. Right to information.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the right to 
information. 
4. Obligations of public authorities.—(1) Every public authority shall— 
(a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a manner and the form which 
facilitates the right to information under this Act and ensure that all records that are appropriate to be 
computerised are, within a reasonable time and subject to availability of resources, computerised and 
connected through a network all over the country on different systems so that access to such records 
is facilitated; 
(b) publish within one hundred and twenty days from the enactment of this Act,— 
(i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties; 
(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and employees; 
(iii) the procedure followed in the decision making process, including channels of supervision 
and accountability; 
(iv) the norms set by it for the discharge of its functions; 
(v) the rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records, held by it or under its control or 
used by its employees for discharging its functions; 
(vi) a statement of the categories of documents that are held by it or under its control; 
(vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with, or representation by, 
the members of the public in relation to the formulation of its policy or implementation thereof; 
(viii) a statement of the boards, councils, committees and other bodies consisting of two or 
more persons constituted as its part or for the purpose of its advice, and as to whether meetings of 
those boards, councils, committees and other bodies are open to the public, or the minutes of such 
meetings are accessible for public; 
(ix) a directory of its officers and employees; 
(x) the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and employees, including the 
system of compensation as provided in its regulations; 
(xi) the budget allocated to each of its agency, indicating the particulars of all plans, proposed 
expenditures and reports on disbursements made; 
(xii) the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the amounts allocated and 
the details of beneficiaries of such programmes; 
(xiii) particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorisations granted by it; 
(xiv) details in respect of the information, available to or held by it, reduced in an electronic 
form; 

8 
 
(xv) the particulars of facilities available to citizens for obtaining information, including the 
working hours of a library or reading room, if maintained for public use; 
(xvi) the names, designations and other particulars of the Public Information Officers; 
(xvii) such other information as may be prescribed; 
and thereafter update these publications every year; 
(c) publish all relevant facts while formulating important policies or announcing the decisions 
which affect public; 
(d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi-judicial decisions to affected persons. 
(2) It shall be a constant endeavour of every public authority to take steps in accordance with the 
requirements of clause (b) of sub-section (1) to provide as much information suomotu to the public at 
regular intervals through various means of communications, including internet, so that the public have 
minimum resort to the use of this Act to obtain information. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), every information shall be disseminated widely and in such 
form and manner which is easily accessible to the public. 
(4) All materials shall be disseminated taking into consideration the cost effectiveness, local language 
and the most effective method of communication in that local area and the information should be easily 
accessible, to the extent possible in electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, available free or at such cost of the medium or the print 
cost price as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (3) and (4), “disseminated” means making known or 
communicated the information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, 
media broadcasts, the internet or any other means, including inspection of offices of any public authority. 
5. Designation of Public Information Officers.—(1) Every public authority shall, within one 
hundred days of the enactment of this Act, designate as many officers as the Central Public Information 
Officers or State Public Information Officers, as the case may be, in all administrative units or offices 
under it as may be necessary to provide information to persons requesting for the information under this 
Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), every public authority shall designate an 
officer, within one hundred days of the enactment of this Act, at each sub-divisional level or other sub-
district level as a Central Assistant Public Information Officer or a State Assistant Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, to receive the applications for information or appeals under this Act for 
forwarding the same forthwith to the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information 
Officer or senior officer specified under sub-section (1) of section 19 or the Central Information 
Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case may be: 
Provided that where an application for information or appeal is given to a Central Assistant Public 
Information Officer or a State Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case may be, a period of five 
days shall be added in computing the period for response specified under sub-section (1) of section 7. 
(3) Every Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
shall deal with requests from persons seeking information and render reasonable assistance to the persons 
seeking such information. 
(4) The Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
may seek the assistance of any other officer as he or she considers it necessary for the proper discharge of 
his or her duties. 
(5) Any officer, whose assistance has been sought under sub-section (4), shall render all assistance to 
the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, seeking 
his or her assistance and for the purposes of any contravention of the provisions of this Act, such other 
officer shall be treated as a Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the 
case may be. 
 

9 
 
6. Request for obtaining information.—(1) A person, who desires to obtain any information under 
this Act, shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official 
language of the area in which the application is being made, accompanying such fee as may be 
prescribed, to— 
(a) the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may 
be, of the concerned public authority; 
(b) the Central Assistant Public Information Officer or State Assistant Public Information Officer, 
as the case may be, 
specifying the particulars of the information sought by him or her: 
Provided that where such request cannot be made in writing, the Central Public Information Officer 
or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to the 
person making the request orally to reduce the same in writing. 
(2) An applicant making request for information shall not be required to give any reason for 
requesting the information or any other personal details except those that may be necessary for contacting 
him. 
(3) Where an application is made to a public authority requesting for an information,— 
(i) which is held by another public authority; or 
(ii) the subject matter of which is more closely connected with the functions of another public 
authority, 
the public authority, to which such application is made, shall transfer the application or such part of it as 
may be appropriate to that other public authority and inform the applicant immediately about such 
transfer: 
Provided that the transfer of an application pursuant to this sub-section shall be made as soon as 
practicable but in no case later than five days from the date of receipt of the application. 
7. Disposal of request.—(1) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 5 or the proviso to 
sub-section (3) of section 6, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be, on receipt of a request under section 6 shall, as expeditiously as possible, and in any case 
within thirty days of the receipt of the request, either provide the information on payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed or reject the request for any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9: 
Provided that where the information sought for concerns the life or liberty of a person, the same shall 
be provided within forty-eight hours of the receipt of the request. 
(2) If the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
fails to give decision on the request for information within the period specified under sub-section (1), the 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to have refused the request. 
(3) Where a decision is taken to provide the information on payment of any further fee representing 
the cost of providing the information, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, shall send an intimation to the person making the request, giving— 
(a) the details of further fees representing the cost of providing the information as determined by 
him, together with the calculations made to arrive at the amount in accordance with fee prescribed 
under sub-section (1), requesting him to deposit that fees, and the period intervening between the 
despatch of the said intimation and payment of fees shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating 
the period of thirty days referred to in that sub-section; 
(b) information concerning his or her right with respect to review the decision as to the amount of 
fees charged or the form of access provided, including the particulars of the appellate authority, time 
limit, process and any other forms. 

10 
 
(4) Where access to the record or a part thereof is required to be provided under this Act and the 
person to whom access is to be provided is sensorily disabled, the Central Public Information Officer or 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall provide assistance to enable access to the 
information, including providing such assistance as may be appropriate for the inspection. 
(5) Where access to information is to be provided in the printed or in any electronic format, the 
applicant shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), pay such fee as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the fee prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 6 and sub-sections (1) and (5) of 
section 7 shall be reasonable and no such fee shall be charged from the persons who are of below poverty 
line as may be determined by the appropriate Government. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), the person making request for the 
information shall be provided the information free of charge where a public authority fails to comply with 
the time limits specified in sub-section (1). 
(7) Before taking any decision under sub-section (1), the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall take into consideration the representation made by a 
third party under section 11. 
(8) Where a request has been rejected under sub-section (1), the Central Public Information Officer or 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall communicate to the person making the 
request,— 
(i) the reasons for such rejection; 
(ii) the period within which an appeal against such rejection may be preferred; and 
(iii) the particulars of the appellate authority. 
(9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which it is sought unless it would 
disproportionately divert the resources of the public authority or would be detrimental to the safety or 
preservation of the record in question. 
8. Exemption from disclosure of information.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
there shall be no obligation to give any citizen,— 
(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic interests of the State, relation with foreign State or 
lead to incitement of an offence; 
(b) information which has been expressly forbidden to be published by any court of law or 
tribunal or the disclosure of which may constitute contempt of court; 
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a breach of privilege of Parliament or the 
State Legislature; 
(d) information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the 
disclosure of which would harm the competitive position of a third party, unless the competent 
authority is satisfied that larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information; 
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary relationship, unless the competent authority 
is satisfied that the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information; 
(f) information received in confidence from foreign Government; 
(g) information, the disclosure of which would endanger the life or physical safety of any person 
or identify the source of information or assistance given in confidence for law enforcement or security 
purposes; 
(h) information which would impede the process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution 
of offenders; 
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the Council of Ministers, Secretaries and 
other officers: 

11 
 
Provided that the decisions of Council of Ministers, the reasons thereof, and the material on the 
basis of which the decisions were taken shall be made public after the decision has been taken, and 
the matter is complete, or over: 
Provided further that those matters which come under the exemptions specified in this section 
shall not be disclosed; 
1[(j) information which relates to personal information;] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923) nor any of the 
exemptions permissible in accordance with sub-section (1), a public authority may allow access to 
information, if public interest in disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected interests. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of clauses (a), (c) and (i) of sub-section (1), any information relating to 
any occurrence, event or matter which has taken place, occurred or happened twenty years before the date 
on which any request is made under section 6 shall be provided to any person making a request under that 
section: 
Provided that where any question arises as to the date from which the said period of twenty years has 
to be computed, the decision of the Central Government shall be final, subject to the usual appeals 
provided for in this Act. 
9. Grounds for rejection to access in certain cases.—Without prejudice to the provisions of              
section 8, a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
may reject a request for information where such a request for providing access would involve an 
infringement of copyright subsisting in a person other than the State. 
10. Severability.—(1) Where a request for access to information is rejected on the ground that it is in 
relation to information which is exempt from disclosure, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, access may be provided to that part of the record which does not contain any information which is 
exempt from disclosure under this Act and which can reasonably be severed from any part that contains 
exempt information. 
(2) Where access is granted to a part of the record under sub-section (1), the Central Public 
Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall give a notice to the 
applicant, informing— 
(a) that only part of the record requested, after severance of the record containing information 
which is exempt from disclosure, is being provided; 
(b) the reasons for the decision, including any findings on any material question of fact, referring 
to the material on which those findings were based; 
(c) the name and designation of the person giving the decision; 
(d) the details of the fees calculated by him or her and the amount of fee which the applicant is 
required to deposit; and 
(e) his or her rights with respect to review of the decision regarding non-disclosure of part of the 
information, the amount of fee charged or the form of access provided, including the particulars of the 
senior officer specified under sub-section (1) of section 19 or the Central Information Commission or 
the State Information Commission, as the case may be, time limit, process and any other form of 
access. 
11. Third party information.—(1) Where a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, intends to disclose any information or record, or part thereof on a 
request made under this Act, which relates to or has been supplied by a third party and has been treated as 
confidential by that third party, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
 
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2023, s. 44 for clause (j) (w.e.f. 13-11-2025). 

12 
 
Officer, as the case may be, shall, within five days from the receipt of the request, give a written notice to 
such third party of the request and of the fact that the Central Public Information Officer or State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, intends to disclose the information or record, or part thereof, and 
invite the third party to make a submission in writing or orally, regarding whether the information should 
be disclosed, and such submission of the third party shall be kept in view while taking a decision about 
disclosure of information: 
Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial secrets protected by law, disclosure may be 
allowed if the public interest in disclosure outweighs in importance any possible harm or injury to the 
interests of such third party. 
(2) Where a notice is served by the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, under sub-section (1) to a third party in respect of any information or record 
or part thereof, the third party shall, within ten days from the date of receipt of such notice, be given the 
opportunity to make representation against the proposed disclosure. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall, within forty days after receipt of the request under 
section 6, if the third party has been given an opportunity to make representation under sub-section (2), 
make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the information or record or part thereof and give in 
writing the notice of his decision to the third party. 
(4) A notice given under sub-section (3) shall include a statement that the third party to whom the 
notice is given is entitled to prefer an appeal under section 19 against the decision. 
CHAPTER III 
THE CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION 
12. Constitution of Central Information Commission.—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the Central Information Commission 
to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act. 
(2) The Central Information Commission shall consist of— 
(a) the Chief Information Commissioner; and 
(b) such number of Central Information Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be deemed 
necessary. 
(3) The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be appointed by the 
President on the recommendation of a committee consisting of— 
(i) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the committee; 
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and 
(iii) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the House of the People has not been recognised as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the House of the People shall be deemed to be the Leader of 
Opposition. 
(4) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the Central Information 
Commission shall vest in the Chief Information Commissioner who shall be assisted by the Information 
Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may be exercised 
or done by the Central Information Commission autonomously without being subjected to directions by 
any other authority under this Act. 
(5) The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be persons of 
eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, social 
service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance. 

13 
 
(6) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall not be a Member of 
Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, or hold any 
other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any business or pursuing any 
profession. 
(7) The headquarters of the Central Information Commission shall be at Delhi and the Central 
Information Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at 
other places in India. 
13. Term of office and conditions of service.—(1) The Chief Information Commissioner shall hold 
office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by the Central Government] and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment: 
Provided that no Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained the 
age of sixty-five years. 
(2) Every Information Commissioner shall hold office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government] or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be 
eligible for reappointment as such Information Commissioner: 
Provided that every Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this sub-section be 
eligible for appointment as the Chief Information Commissioner in the manner specified in                   
sub-section (3) of section 12: 
Provided further that where the Information Commissioner is appointed as the Chief Information 
Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the Information 
Commissioner and the Chief Information Commissioner. 
(3) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall before he enters 
upon his office make and subscribe before the President or some other person appointed by him in that 
behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule. 
(4) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may, at any time, by 
writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign from his office: 
Provided that the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may be removed 
in the manner specified under section 14. 
2[(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief 
Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief Information 
Commissioner or the Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment: 
Provided further that the Chief Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners 
appointed before the commencement of the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 (24 of 2019) 
shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder as if the Right 
to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 (24 of 2019) had not come into force.] 
 
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2019, s. 2, for “for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office” (w.e.f. 24-10-
2019). 
2. Subs. by, s. 2, ibid., for sub-section (5) (w.e.f. 24-10-2019). 

14 
 
(6) The Central Government shall provide the Chief Information Commissioner and the Information 
Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of 
their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
14. Removal of Chief Information Commissioner or Information Commissioner.—(1) Subject to 
the provisions of sub-section (3), the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner 
shall be removed from his office only by order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the President, has, on inquiry, reported 
that the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner, as the case may be, ought on 
such ground be removed. 
(2) The President may suspend from office, and if deem necessary prohibit also from attending the 
office during inquiry, the Chief Information Commissioner or Information Commissioner in respect of 
whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub-section (1) until the President has 
passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the President may by order remove from 
office the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner if the Chief Information 
Commissioner or a Information Commissioner, as the case may be,— 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the President, involves moral 
turpitude; or 
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or 
(d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the Chief Information Commissioner or a Information Commissioner. 
(4) If the Chief Information Commissioner or a Information Commissioner in any way, concerned or 
interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or participates in 
any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a 
member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the purposes 
of sub-section (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour. 
CHAPTER IV 
THE STATE INFORMATION COMMISSION 
15. Constitution of State Information Commission.—(1) Every State Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the ......... (name of the State) 
Information Commission to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it 
under this Act. 
(2) The State Information Commission shall consist of— 
(a) the State Chief Information Commissioner, and 
(b) such number of State Information Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be deemed 
necessary. 
(3) The State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of a committee consisting of— 
(i) the Chief Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the committee; 

15 
 
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly; and 
(iii) a Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Chief Minister. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the Legislative Assembly has not been recognised as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the Legislative Assembly shall be deemed to be the Leader of 
Opposition. 
(4) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the State Information 
Commission shall vest in the State Chief Information Commissioner who shall be assisted by the State 
Information Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may 
be exercised or done by the State Information Commission autonomously without being subjected to 
directions by any other authority under this Act. 
(5) The State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be 
persons of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, 
social service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance. 
(6) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner shall not be a 
Member of Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, 
or hold any other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any business or 
pursuing any profession. 
(7) The headquarters of the State Information Commission shall be at such place in the State as the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and the State Information 
Commission may, with the previous approval of the State Government, establish offices at other places in 
the State. 
16. Term of office and conditions of service.—(1) The State Chief Information Commissioner shall 
hold office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by the Central Government] and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment: 
Provided that no State Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained 
the age of sixty-five years. 
(2) Every State Information Commissioner shall hold office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government] or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be 
eligible for reappointment as such State Information Commissioner: 
Provided that every State Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this sub-
section, be eligible for appointment as the State Chief Information Commissioner in the manner specified 
in sub-section (3) of section 15: 
Provided further that where the State Information Commissioner is appointed as the State Chief 
Information Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the State 
Information Commissioner and the State Chief Information Commissioner. 
(3) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner, shall before he 
enters upon his office make and subscribe before the Governor or some other person appointed by him in 
that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule. 
(4) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner may, at any 
time, by writing under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign from his office: 
Provided that the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner may 
be removed in the manner specified under section 17. 
 
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2019, s. 3, for, “for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office” (w.e.f. 24-10-
2019). 

16 
 
1[(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the State 
Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the State Chief Information 
Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after 
their appointment: 
Provided further that the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information 
Commissioners appointed before the commencement of the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 
shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under as if the Right 
to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 had not come into force.] 
(6) The State Government shall provide the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State 
Information Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms 
and conditions of service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 
17. Removal of State Chief Information Commissioner or State Information Commissioner.—
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State 
Information Commissioner shall be removed from his office only by order of the Governor on the ground 
of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the Governor, 
has on inquiry, reported that the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information 
Commissioner, as the case may be, ought on such ground be removed. 
(2) The Governor may suspend from office, and if deem necessary prohibit also from attending the 
office during inquiry, the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner in 
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub-section (1) until the 
Governor has passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Governor may by order remove from 
office the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner if a State Chief 
Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner, as the case may be,— 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Governor, involves moral 
turpitude; or 
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or 
(d) is, in the opinion of the Governor, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner. 
(4) If the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner in any way, 
concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of the State 
or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emoluments arising therefrom 
otherwise than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he 
shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour. 
CHAPTER V 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONS, APPEAL AND PENALTIES 
18. Powers and functions of Information Commissions.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
it shall be the duty of the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, to receive and inquire into a complaint from any person,— 
 
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2019, s. 3, for sub-section (5), (w.e.f. 24-10-2019). 

17 
 
(a) who has been unable to submit a request to a Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, either by reason that no such officer has been 
appointed under this Act, or because the Central Assistant Public Information Officer or State 
Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has refused to accept his or her application 
for information or appeal under this Act for forwarding the same to the Central Public Information 
Officer or State Public Information Officer or senior officer specified in sub-section (1) of section 19 
or the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case may be; 
(b) who has been refused access to any information requested under this Act; 
(c) who has not been given a response to a request for information or access to information within 
the time limit specified under this Act; 
(d) who has been required to pay an amount of fee which he or she considers unreasonable; 
(e) who believes that he or she has been given incomplete, misleading or false information under 
this Act; and 
(f) in respect of any other matter relating to requesting or obtaining access to records under this 
Act. 
(2) Where the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may 
be, is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter, it may initiate an inquiry in 
respect thereof. 
(3) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall, 
while inquiring into any matter under this section, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and compel them to give oral or written 
evidence on oath and to produce the documents or things; 
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any other Act of Parliament or State 
Legislature, as the case may be, the Central Information Commission or the State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, may, during the inquiry of any complaint under this Act, examine any 
record to which this Act applies which is under the control of the public authority, and no such record 
may be withheld from it on any grounds. 
19. Appeal.—(1) Any person who, does not receive a decision within the time specified in  
sub-section (1) or clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 7, or is aggrieved by a decision of the Central 
Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, may within thirty days 
from the expiry of such period or from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to such officer who 
is senior in rank to the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer as the case 
may be, in each public authority: 
Provided that such officer may admit the appeal after the expiry of the period of thirty days if he or 
she is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(2) Where an appeal is preferred against an order made by a Central Public Information Officer or a 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, under section 11 to disclose third party information, 
the appeal by the concerned third party shall be made within thirty days from the date of the order. 

18 
 
(3) A second appeal against the decision under sub-section (1) shall lie within ninety days from the 
date on which the decision should have been made or was actually received, with the Central Information 
Commission or the State Information Commission: 
Provided that the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, may admit the appeal after the expiry of the period of ninety days if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(4) If the decision of the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be, against which an appeal is preferred relates to information of a third party, the Central 
Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall give a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to that third party. 
(5) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial of a request was justified shall be on the 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, who denied 
the request. 
(6) An appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be disposed of within thirty days of the 
receipt of the appeal or within such extended period not exceeding a total of forty-five days from the date 
of filing thereof, as the case may be, for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
(7) The decision of the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the 
case may be, shall be binding. 
(8) In its decision, the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, has the power to— 
(a) require the public authority to take any such steps as may be necessary to secure compliance 
with the provisions of this Act, including— 
(i) by providing access to information, if so requested, in a particular form; 
(ii) by appointing a Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be; 
(iii) by publishing certain information or categories of information; 
(iv) by making necessary changes to its practices in relation to the maintenance, management 
and destruction of records; 
(v) by enhancing the provision of training on the right to information for its officials; 
(vi) by providing it with an annual report in compliance with clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 4; 
(b) require the public authority to compensate the complainant for any loss or other detriment 
suffered; 
(c) impose any of the penalties provided under this Act; 
(d) reject the application. 
(9) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall 
give notice of its decision, including any right of appeal, to the complainant and the public authority. 
(10) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, 
shall decide the appeal in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. 
20. Penalties.—(1)Where the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, 
as the case may be, at the time of deciding any complaint or appeal is of the opinion that the Central 
Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has, without any 
reasonable cause, refused to receive an application for information or has not furnished information 
within the time specified under sub-section (1) of section 7 or malafidely denied the request for 
information or knowingly given incorrect, incomplete or misleading information or destroyed information 
which was the subject of the request or obstructed in any manner in furnishing the information, it shall 

19 
 
impose a penalty of two hundred and fifty rupees each day till application is received or information is 
furnished, so however, the total amount of such penalty shall not exceed twenty-five thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the 
case may be, shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any penalty is imposed on 
him: 
Provided further that the burden of proving that he acted reasonably and diligently shall be on the 
Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be. 
(2) Where the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, at the time of deciding any complaint or appeal is of the opinion that the Central Public 
Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has, without any 
reasonable cause and persistently, failed to receive an application for information or has not furnished 
information within the time specified under sub-section (1) of section 7 or malafidely denied the request 
for information or knowingly given incorrect, incomplete or misleading information or destroyed 
information which was the subject of the request or obstructed in any manner in furnishing the 
information, it shall recommend for disciplinary action against the Central Public Information Officer or 
the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, under the service rules applicable to him. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule made thereunder. 
22. Act to have overriding effect.—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923), and any other 
law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
23. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.—No court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding 
in respect of any order made under this Act and no such order shall be called in question otherwise than 
by way of an appeal under this Act. 
24. Act not to apply to certain organisations.—(1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the 
intelligence and security organisations specified in the Second Schedule, being organisations established 
by the Central Government or any information furnished by such organisations to that Government: 
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations 
shall not be excluded under this sub-section: 
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of 
human rights, the information shall only be provided after the approval of the Central Information 
Commission, and notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, such information shall be provided 
within forty-five days from the date of the receipt of request. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule by 
including therein any other intelligence or security organisation established by that Government or 
omitting therefrom any organisation already specified therein and on the publication of such notification, 
such organisation shall be deemed to be included in or, as the case may be, omitted from the Schedule. 
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security organisation being 
organisations established by the State Government, as that Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify: 
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations 
shall not be excluded under this sub-section: 

20 
 
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of 
human rights, the information shall only be provided after the approval of the State Information 
Commission and, notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, such information shall be provided 
within forty-five days from the date of the receipt of request. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before the State Legislature. 
25. Monitoring and reporting.—(1) The Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, shall, as soon as practicable after the end of each year, prepare a report 
on the implementation of the provisions of this Act during that year and forward a copy thereof to the 
appropriate Government. 
(2) Each Ministry or Department shall, in relation to the public authorities within their jurisdiction, 
collect and provide such information to the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, as is required to prepare the report under this section and comply with 
the requirements concerning the furnishing of that information and keeping of records for the purposes of 
this section. 
(3) Each report shall state in respect of the year to which the report relates,— 
(a) the number of requests made to each public authority; 
(b) the number of decisions where applicants were not entitled to access to the documents 
pursuant to the requests, the provisions of this Act under which these decisions were made and the 
number of times such provisions were invoked; 
(c) the number of appeals referred to the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, for review, the nature of the appeals and the outcome of the appeals; 
(d) particulars of any disciplinary action taken against any officer in respect of the administration 
of this Act; 
(e) the amount of charges collected by each public authority under this Act; 
(f) any facts which indicate an effort by the public authorities to administer and implement the 
spirit and intention of this Act; 
(g) recommendations for reform, including recommendations in respect of the particular public 
authorities, for the development, improvement, modernisation, reform or amendment to this Act or 
other legislation or common law or any other matter relevant for operationalising the right to access 
information. 
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may, as soon as practicable 
after the end of each year, cause a copy of the report of the Central Information Commission or the State 
Information Commission, as the case may be, referred to in sub-section (1) to be laid before each House 
of Parliament or, as the case may be, before each House of the State Legislature, where there are two 
Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature before that House. 
(5) If it appears to the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, that the practice of a public authority in relation to the exercise of its functions under this Act 
does not conform with the provisions or spirit of this Act, it may give to the authority a recommendation 
specifying the steps which ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting such conformity. 
26. Appropriate Government to prepare programmes.—(1) The appropriate Government may, to 
the extent of availability of financial and other resources,— 
(a) develop and organise educational programmes to advance the understanding of the public, in 
particular of disadvantaged communities as to how to exercise the rights contemplated under this Act; 
(b) encourage public authorities to participate in the development and organisation of 
programmes referred to in clause (a) and to undertake such programmes themselves; 
(c) promote timely and effective dissemination of accurate information by public authorities 
about their activities; and 

21 
 
(d) train Central Public Information Officers or State Public Information Officers, as the case may 
be, of public authorities and produce relevant training materials for use by the public authorities 
themselves. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall, within eighteen months from the commencement of this Act, 
compile in its official language a guide containing such information, in an easily comprehensible form 
and manner, as may reasonably be required by a person who wishes to exercise any right specified in this 
Act. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall, if necessary, update and publish the guidelines referred to in 
sub-section (2) at regular intervals which shall, in particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
sub-section (2), include— 
(a) the objects of this Act; 
(b) the postal and street address, the phone and fax number and, if available, electronic mail 
address of the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may 
be, of every public authority appointed under sub-section (1) of section 5; 
(c) the manner and the form in which request for access to an information shall be made to a 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be; 
(d) the assistance available from and the duties of the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, of a public authority under this Act; 
(e) the assistance available from the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be; 
(f) all remedies in law available regarding an act or failure to act in respect of a right or duty 
conferred or imposed by this Act including the manner of filing an appeal to the Commission; 
(g) the provisions providing for the voluntary disclosure of categories of records in accordance 
with section 4; 
(h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in relation to requests for access to an information; and 
(i) any additional regulations or circulars made or issued in relation to obtaining access to an 
information in accordance with this Act. 
(4) The appropriate Government must, if necessary, update and publish the guidelines at regular 
intervals. 
27. Power to make rules by appropriate Government.—(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to be disseminated under                     
sub-section (4) of section 4; 
(b) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(c) the fee payable under sub-sections (1) and (5) of section 7; 
1[(ca) the term of office of the Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners 
under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 13 and the State Chief Information Commissioner and State 
Information Commissioners under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 16; 
(cb) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Information 
Commissioner and the Information Commissioners under sub-section (5) of section 13 and the State 
Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners under sub-section (5) of 
section 16;] 
 
1.  Ins. by Act 24 of 2019, s.  4 (w.e.f. 24-10-2019).  

22 
 
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of service of the officers 
and other employees under sub-section (6) of section 13 and sub-section (6) of section 16; 
(e) the procedure to be adopted by the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, in deciding the appeals under sub-section (10) of section 19; and 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
28. Power to make rules by competent authority.—(1) The competent authority may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to be disseminated under                     
sub-section (4) of section 4; 
(ii) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(iii) the fee payable under sub-section (1) of section 7; and 
(iv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
29. Laying of rules.—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
notified, before the State Legislature. 
30. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removal of 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
31. Repeal.—The Freedom of Information Act, 2002 (5 of 2003) is hereby repealed. 

23 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 13 (3) and 16(3)] 
FORM OF OATH OR AFFIRMATION TO BE MADE BY THE CHIEF INFORMATION COMMISSIONER/THE 
INFORMATION COMMISSIONER/THE STATE CHIEF INFORMATION COMMISSIONER/THE STATE 
INFORMATION COMMISSIONER 
“I, 
....................., 
having 
been 
appointed 
Chief 
Information 
Commissioner/Information 
Commissioner/State 
Chief 
Information 
Commissioner/State 
Information 
Commissioner  
swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the  
solemnly affirm 
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I 
will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my 
office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”. 

24 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 24) 
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISATION ESTABLISHED BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
1. Intelligence Bureau. 
1[2. Research and Analysis Wing including its technical wing namely, the Aviation Research 
Centre of the Cabinet Secretariat.] 
3. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence. 
4. Central Economic Intelligence Bureau. 
5. Directorate of Enforcement. 
6. Narcotics Control Bureau. 
7. 2***. 
8. Special 3[Frontier] Force of the Cabinet Secretariat. 
9. Border Security Force. 
10. Central Reserve Police Force. 
11. Indo-Tibetan Border Police. 
12. Central Industrial Security Force. 
13. National Security Guards. 
14. Assam Rifles. 
4[15. Sashtra Seema Bal.] 
5[16. Directorate General of Income-tax (Investigation).] 
5[17. National Technical Research Organisation.] 
5[18. Financial Intelligence Unit, India.] 
6[19. Special Protection Group. 
 20. Defence Research and Development Organisation. 
 21. Border Road Development Board. 
 7* 
* 
* 
* 
*] 
8[22. National Security Council Secretariat.] 
 9[23. Central Bureau of Investigation. 
 24. National Investigation Agency. 
 25. National Intelligence Grid.] 
10[26. Strategic Forces Command.] 
 
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 319(E), dated 4-5-2021. 
2. Serial Number 7 omitted by notification No. G.S.R. 319(E), dated 4-5-2021. 
3. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 319(E), dated 4-5-2021. 
4. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 347, dated 28-9-2005. 
5. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 235(E) dated 27-3-2008. 
6. Ins. by notification No. G.S.R. 347, dated 28-9-2005. 
7. Omitted by G.S.R. 235(E) dated 27-3-2008. 
8. Added by notification No. G.S.R. 726(E), dated 8-10-2008. 
9. Added by notification No. G.S.R. 442(E), dated 9-6-2011. 
10. Ins. by notification No. G.S.R. 673(E) dated 8-7-2016. 

25 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order to ensure greater and more effective access to information, the Government resolved 
that the Freedom of Information Act, 2002 enacted by the Parliament needs to be made more 
progressive, participatory and meaningful. The National Advisory Council deliberated on the 
issue and suggested certain important changes to be incorporated in the existing Act to ensure 
smoother and greater access to information. The Government examined the suggestions made by 
the National Advisory Council and others and decided to make a number of changes in the law. 
The important changes proposed to be incorporated, inter alia, include establishment of an 
appellate machinery with investigating powers to review decisions of the Public Information 
Officers; penal provisions for failure to provide information as per law; provisions to ensure 
maximum disclosure and minimum exemptions, consistent with the constitutional provisions, 
and effective mechanism for access to information and disclosure by authorities, etc. In view of 
significant changes proposed in the existing Act, the Government also decided to repeal the 
Freedom of Information Act, 2002. The proposed legislation will provide an effective framework 
for effectuating the right of information recognized under Article 19 of the Constitution of India. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
SURESH PACHOURI. 
NEW DELHI;  
The 18th December, 2004 
